# Chapter 3: Fireball

_Source pages: 44-57_

## Page 44

ESIDENTS OF TuOLLSKULL ALLEY ARE SHAKEN by a loud whoosh, rattling windows, and the screams of city folk. A fireball spell has just detonated in the street, and the neighborhood is thrown into chaos. As members of the City Guard, the City Watch, and the Watchful Order of Magists and Protectors rush to the scene, the characters are afforded a chance to assess the damage and investigate further. This incident sets into motion the main plot and puts the characters on a colli sion course with those who want to find and claim Lord Neverember's hidden cache of gold. The fireball goes off early in the morning, at a time when all the characters are in Trollskull Manor. Read aloud the following text ro set the scene: Windows rattle as the roar of an explosion fills Trollskull Alley. Charred bodies and anguished screams Ay through the air. A thick cloud of acrid smoke billows outward from the blast, which seems to have occurred right out side your door. Let the players tell you what their characters are doing at this moment and how they react to the explosion. Those who want to guess the nature of the explosion can, with a successful DC 13 Intelligence (Arcana) check, conclude that someone just cast a fireball spell outside.

### What'S Happening Here?

Dalakhar, a rock gnome spy working for Lord Dagult Neverember, was on his way to see the characters when the fireball went off, killing him and ten other people. The gnome is important because he was carrying the Stone ofGolorr(see appendix A)-the key to finding Lord Neverember's hidden cache of gold. Hounded by agents of the Zhentarim, the Xanathar Guild, and Bregan D'aerthe. Dalakhar was unable to escape from Waterdeep with the artifact, so he planned to entrust it to the characters briefly, for surely the folk who rescued Lord Neverember's son could keep it safe where he could not. By the time the events of this chapter have played out, the Stone ofGolorr has changed hands a few times and the characters have learned more about the big pic ture-though they still have a long chase ahead of them.

### Zhents Caug H T I N The Act

Three members of the Black etwork, including the Zhent assassin Urstul Floxin (see appendix B), were close to nabbing Dalakhar when they were caught in the blast. Of the three, only Urstul survived. Though he was wounded, he was able to pluck the Stone ofGolorr from Dalakhar's pocket before fleeing the scene. While other survivors were coming to their senses, Urstul stumbled through the smoke and haze and eventually made his way back to Gralhund Villa a short distance away.

### Chapter 3 I Fireball

## Page 45

### House G Ralhun D ---

The heads of the Gralhund noble family, Yalah Gralhund and her husband, Orond, are providing coin and shel ter to Urstul and his fellow Zhents in exchange for the promise of getting their fair share of the hidden cache of gold. But the Gralhunds aren't willing to put the ir trust entirely in the Black Network; they sent out their own agent to shadow the Zhents , eliminate Dalakhar, and obtain the Stone ofGolorr on their behalf. Yalah gave the would-be assassin a necklace of fireballs with instruction s on how and when to use it. When it seemed as though Dalakhar might give Urstul Floxin the slip, this agent hurled one of the beads from the necklace to stop the gnome in his tracks. The Gralhunds' assassin is a nirnblewright (see appendix B) that escaped from the House oflnspired Hands, the temple ofGond in the Sea Ward, a month ago. The construct hitched a ride on House Gralhund's coach. Yalah Gralhund befriended it, offered it shelter, and used it as a servant until she and her husband found a more sinister use for it. The incident with the fireball has strained the alliance between the Gralhunds and the Black Network. Urstul Floxin is refusing to hand over the Stone ofGolorr until he speaks to his secret master, Manshoon. Meanwhile, the Gralhunds are weighing the risks of betraying and murdering Urstu l in their own house. If the cha racters' investigation go well, they'll blunder into this den of snakes before the chapter is done.

### Unraveling The P Lot

During their investigation, the characters should learn who or what cast the fireball (a nimblewright), why the attack was commitled (to stea l the Stone ofGolorr), and where the stone was taken (Gralhund Villa). lf the inves tigation stalls, friendly NPCs might step forward to help in exchange for compensation. One such figure is Vin cent Trench, the private detective , who lives in Trollskull Alley (see chapter 2, area TS). The characters can also consu lt with friendly factions such as the Harpers.

### The Crime Scene

In the wake of the explosion, people emerge from their houses and shops to survey the devastation. The fire ball didn't set any buildings ablaze, but it left eleven people dead: • One elderly female human who was out for a walk (no one recognizes her) • Two cloaked male humans (Zhentarim sellswords) clad in leather armor with sheathed longswords Two female humans and one male half-elf dressed in plain clothes (servants of wealthy North Ward fami lies, killed while running errands) • One male gnome (Dalakhar) wearin g a burned cloak and clutching a dagger • Two fema le halflings who were playing a flute and a fiddle, and two male halflings who were dancing The characters have only a few minutes to search the crime scene before members of the City Guard ar rive. After that, they aren't allowed anywhere near the OH APT£R 3 I FIRl!BALl . bodies, although invisible and similarly hidden charac ters can search the crime scene further. A search of the bodies accompanied by a successful DC lS Wisdom (Perce ption) check reveals the following: • One of the dead male humans has a black, winged snake (the symbo l of the Black Network) tattooed on his right forearm. • The dead gnome has dry waste on his boots and cloak, suggesting he has spent time in the sewers recently. He also has a pouch containing five 100 gp gemstones. A cha racter can try to snatch Dalakhar's pouch with out being seen by NPC onlookers, doing so with a suc cessful DC 13 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check . On a failed check, the character still acquires the pouch, but someone observes the theft and reports it to City Watch constables once they show up (see "The Watch Arrives" below). This witness to the theft can be silence d with a bribe of SO gp or more.

### After The Blast

The characters have a few minutes to examine the crime scene before the City Guard arrives and cordons off Trollskull Alley, posting six guards at each entrance. The guards don't allow anyone in or out without permis sion from a superior officer. Another six guar ds, includ ing a sergeant with 18 hit points , make their way to the crime scene and watch over the dead bodies until the City Watch arrives. Lingering smoke from the fireball also attracts a Griffon Cavalry rider (see appendix B). As its griffon mount circles the neighborhood, the rider watches the streets and alleys for suspicious figures.

### The W At Ch Arriv Es

Twenty minutes after the explosion, a City Watch ser geant named Saeth Crom ley (see appendix B) escorts a member of the Watchful Order of Magists and Protec tors named Barnibu s Blastwind (see appendix B) to the crime scene. Barnibus quietly takes charge of the inves tigation at that point, while Sergeant Cromley directs a force of twenty cons tables (veteran s) to knock on door s and question locals. Before allowing the corpses to be removed and taken to local temples, Barnibus inspects the scene closely and reaches the following conclusions, which he prefers to keep to himself but might share with other members of the Watchful Order: • The gnome was running from armed pursue rs, of which there were three. The third person who was chasing the gnome isn't among the dead. • The gnome and his pursuers were moving toward the tavern in Trollskull Alley (which Barnibus will soon come to realize is the chara cters' property). • Neither the gnome nor his pursuers saw the blast coming. Given these findings, Barnibus decides to question the tavern's owners and occ upant s, with Sergeant Cromley by his side as a witness and bodyguard. Spe cifically, Barnibus wants to find out the gnome's identity and whether he was known to anyone. The characters,

## Page 46

having never met Dalakhar, have little information to offer unless they decide to lie. Neither Barnibus nor Sergeant Cromley is quick to jump lo conclusions. They both prefer to have ironclad evidence and testimony from reliable witnesses before making any arrests. Even though the characters are sus pects by virtue of their proximity to the crime scene. it hardly seems plausible that they would unleash destruc tive magic so close to their place of business in broad daylight. Consequently, Barnibus intend s not to take up too much of their time. Barnibus and Sergeant Cromley refuse requests by characters to join the investigation. "That would intro duce too many new variab les into an already confound· ing equation," replies Barnibus with a frown. "Trust in the Watch," Cromley adds dismissively. Characters who seem truthful and honest can press Barnibus for furth er information by making a DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion) check. On a success, they nudge Barnibu s into revealing what he has discovered, as outlined above.

### Eyewitnesses

Many other people witnessed the fireball without being caught in the blast. Three of them have important infor mation to share. Any character who spends at least 1 minute talking to one of them learns what that person saw or heard. (No ability checks are required, since the eyewitnesses are eager to talk.)

### Fala Lefalijr

Fala, the owner of Corellon's Crown (see chapter 2, area T4). relates the following information: "I was watering plants in the greenhouse on the second floor of my shop when the blast blew out some of the windows. Lucky I wasn't injured! Through the smoke, I saw a cloaked man take something from the body of a dead gnome. then start limping away. He was badly burned and casting glances over his shoulder, like he was afraid someone might be following him. He was headed toward the Bent Nail." Pala saw Urstul Floxin fleeing the scene with the Stone ofGolorr in his clutches. He circled around the Bent Nail (see chapter 2. area T2) on his way out of Troll skull Alley. jEZRYNNE HORNRAVEN A Waterdavian born of wealth and privilege. j ezrynne was leaving the Tiger's Eye (see chapter 2, area TS), hav ing just hired Vincent Trench to spy on her philandering husband, when she witnessed the following: "I tell you, it was not a man. More like a puppet shaped like a man. A puppet without strings. It was on the rooftop. It hurled something into the crowd below that caused the explosion. I saw those halflings burned alive! I saw them!" 5A£T>< CROMLEY ANO BARNIBUS BLASTWINO Jezrynne doesn't know what the "puppet" hurled to cause the fireball. She took her eyes off the thing during the chaos and doesn't know where it went.

### Martemtrec

This 12-year-old boy watched as his halning friends per ished in the flames. He didn't see much beyond that, but he found something important after the blast went off: ] "Right after the explosion, I ducked behind a rain barrel. ] Then I heard a 'plop' and found this in the barrel." Martem produces a necklace of fireballs with two beads remaining and a broken clasp. As it fled across a roof top, the nimblewright accidentally yanked on the neck lace. which came off, fell to the roof, slid off the edge, and plopped into the rain barrel next to Martem. He doesn 't know what to make of this object but was planning to keep it. A character can snalch it from him or convince Martem to relinquish it with a successful DC 8 Charisma (Intimidation or Persuasion) check. Characters who withhold the necklace, and knowl edge of it, from the City Watch are guilly of a crime in Waterdeep. Hampering justice by concealing evidence can result in a fine of up to 200 gp and hard labor for up to a tenday. C HAPTER 3 I f'IRl:.BALL

## Page 47

### Speaking With The Vict I Ms

The dead are taken to a City Watch station in the North Ward and kept in a cellar morgue. Clerics from local temples are brought in to cast gentle repose spells on the corpses, to preserve them while the investigation is ongoing. Any character who has a renown of 1 or higher in Force Grey (the Gray Hands), the Harpers, the Lords' All iance, the Order of the Gauntlet, or the Zhentarim can petition their faction representative to hire a cleric to cast speak with de;:id on one or more of the fatalities. The characters can hire a cleric themselves by making a donation of at least 25 gp to the cleric's temple for each casting of the spell. They must also provide a list of questions they want answered. A speak with dead spell can pry some or all of the fol lowing information from Dalakhar's corpse if the right questions are asked: • Dalakhar stole an artifact called the Stone ofGolorr from the lair of a beholder known as Xanathar, in a dungeon deep below the city. Dalakhar worked for the Open Lord of Waterdeep. (Here he refers to Lord Dagult Neverember, whom he believes is the rightful Open Lord, not Laeral Silverhand.) The Stone of Golorr is the key to finding a hoard of dragons hidden in the city. Dalakhar heard about a group of adventurers who rescued Lord Neverember's son from the Zhentarim and thought the Stone ofGolorrwould be safe in their hands for the time being. He was on his way to deliver it to them, planning to come back and reclaim it after he had eluded his pursuers. Then the fireball went off. The following information can be learned by casting speak with dead on one or both of the dead Zhentarim sellswords: Their names were Bashekk Ortallis and Wern Malkrave. They worked for Urstul Floxin and resided al Gralhund Villa. • Their job was to help catch a gnome named Dalakbar. • Dalakhar had some kind of artifact in his possession which, according to Urstul Floxin, would make them as rich as kings. N1M 's SECRET Characters who questionjezrynne Hornraven (see "'Eye witnesses'' above) can get a description of the creature that set off the fireball. It bears a striking similarity to the automatons that sometimes march in the Day of Wonders parade, as anyone who has lived in Waterdeep during the fall season knows. Because the Day of Won ders parade is sponsored by the loca I temp le of Gond, characters might want to visit the temple and investigate a possible connection.

### H Ouse Of I Nspired Hands

The House of Inspired Hands , Waterdeep's temple of Gond, sits on the corner of Seawatch Street and Shark Street in the Sea Ward. If the characters visit the tem ple, they see the following:

### Chapter 3 I Fireball

The House of Inspired Hands looks like a cross be tween a temple and a workshop. The symbol of Gond, a toothed cog with four spokes, is displayed prominently. You see the silhouette of a humanoid shape perching on the rooftop. It extends an arm, releasing a tiny metal sparrow into the sky. The bird does a few loops in the air, then veers right toward you. The creature atop the temple is Nim, a oimblewright (see appendix B). Nim was given to the temple as a gift from a visiting Lantanese wizard and has been creating its own inventions on the sly. One of those inventions was the nimblewright that detonat ed the fireball in Trollskull Alley. Another less -dangerous invention, a mechanical sparrow, is on an accidental collision course with the party. Have the characters roll initiative. Nim's mechanical bird acts on initiative count 10, has a flying speed of 60 feet. and starts 60 feet away from the characters. It has AC 15, l hit point, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. On its turn, it flies toward one party member at random and makes a melee weapon attack (+O to hit) against that character. On a hit, the bird deals 2 (ld3) piercing damage as it slams into the character with surprising force. On a miss, it crashes. Either way, it's destroyed on impact. After the attack, Nim withdraws into the temple's attic through a secret hatch in the roof and lies low, hoping the characters don't report the incident to the temple's acolytes.

### Inside The Temple

The temple of Gond is open and abuzz with activity during daylight hours, then closes from sunset until sun rise. At night. acolytes retire to their private quarters co work on pet projects.

### Hall Of Exemplary Inventions

The main hal l of the temp le holds two dozen marble pedestals. Each one bears a prize -winning invention or a miniature model of some other extraordinary creation. Among the displays are several that stand out: • A 4-foot-tall working model of a clock tower rings at the top of every hour. It is made of wood. iron. bronze, and glass, with brass bells and delicate hands formed from solid gold. • A wooden flying machine has wings that flap when it becomes airborne. • A miniature model of a mechanical dragon turtle has a brass plate affixed to its pedestal that reads, "Big Bclchy. Sank in Deepwater Harbor on the Day of Wonders in 1363 DR." • A functional "waking helmet" equipped with small, articulated metal arms and hands that gently slap the wearer if he or she falls asleep. • A miniature model of a red submarine shaped like a manta ray has a brass plate affixed to its pedestal that reads, "The Scarlet Marpenoth. Lantanese submers ible. Launched in 1489 DR."

## Page 48

### Meeting Valetta

The characters are met by Valetta, a dragonborn priest of bronze dragon ancestry, with these changes: • Valetta is neutral. • She has these racial traits: She can use her action to exhale a 5-foot-wide, 30-foot line of lightning (but can't do this again until she finishes a short or long rest); each creat ure in the line must make a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw, taking 2d6 lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. She has resistance to lightning damage. She speaks Common and Draconic. If the characters mention the figure they saw on the roof of the temple, Valetta identifies it as Nim, a nimblewright that was gifted to the temple by a Lan tanese wizard. If they describe the incident involving the mechanical bird, Valetta sighs and leads them up a spiral staircase to an att ic that Nim uses as a lair- only to find the attic's door fitted with a new lock. Valetta doesn't recognize the lock or have a key to open it, but a characte r using thieves' tools can pick the lock with a successful DC 20 Dexterity check. A knock spell or similar magic also opens the door. Valetta won't allow characters to break down the door, but she does permit them to speak to Nim through the door. A character can persuad e Nim to unlock the door with a successful DC 17 Charisma (Persuasion) check. Valetta grants advan tage on the roll by strongly urging Nim to comply.

### Meeting Nim

Nim understands Common but can't speak. It has de veloped a sim ple sign language that Valetta and other members of the temple staff understand. After the inci dent with the bird, Nim hides am id the clutter in its lair, but it emerges if the cha racters find their way inside or coax it into unlockin g the door. If the characters ask about the other nimblewright, Nim admits (through ges turing to Valetta) that it built the other nimblewright to ease its loneliness. But then Nim's creation Red in con fused terror a month ago. and Nim hasn't seen it since. In light of this revelation, Valetta angrily orders acolytes to remove Nim's tools and unfinished inventions from the attic, while she forces Nim to look on. Nimblewright Detector. Characters who search Nim's attic or watch the area as it's being cleaned out can find a 1-foot-long copper contraption with an um brella-like metallic protrusion at one end. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of divination magic a round it. If asked about it, Nim tells Valetta that it built this device to find the errant nimblewright and tried to seek it out, only to discover that Nim couldn't leave the temple grounds. Once Nim expla ins how the nimblewr ight de tector works, Valetta allows the characters to take it. To activate the nimblewright deteccor, a character must hold down its trigger. When the activated device comes within 500 feet of a nimblewright other than Nim, the umbrella begins to spin, whir, and click. The spinning, whirring, and clicking accelerates as the dis tance to the target lessens, reaching maximum velocity and volume when a nimblewright other than im is within 30 feet of the device.

### N1Mblewrigmt Detec. Tor

### Reward

If the characters want LO track down the wayward nim blewright themselves, Valetta says that the House of In spired Hands will pay them 500 gp to destroy it. If they return with proof of its destruction, Valetta sees that they receive the promised reward and also offers them one each of the following nonmagical inventions: Actjustable Stilts . The stilts take 1 minute to put on or remove. They increase the height of any humanoid wea ring them by 2 to 5 feet. Each stilt weighs 8 pounds and is 1 foot long when fully collapsed. BacJcpacJc Para chute. A humanoid wearing this piece of gear can deploy the parachute as a reaction while fall ing, or as an action otherwise. The parachute requires at least a 10-foot cube of unoccupied space in which to deploy, and it doesn't open fast enough to slow a fall of less than 60 feet. If it has sufficient time and space to deploy properly, the parachute allows its wearer to land without taking falling damage. Once it has been used, the parachute takes 10 minutes to repack. Barking Box. This metal cube, 6 inches on a side, has a crank on top. Using an action to wind the crank activaLes the box for 8 hours. While activated, the box barks whenever it detects vibrations within 15 feet of it, as long as the box and the source of the vibrations are in contact with the same ground or substance. A switch on one side of the box sets the device to emit either a sma ll dog's bark or a large dog's bark. CHAPTER 3 I FIREBALi.

## Page 49

JllRLllKLE 811ENRE

### Chapter 3 I Fireball

Matchless Pipe. A switch made of flint is built into the bowl of this fine wooden smoking pipe. With a few flicks of the switch, the pipe lights itself. FIN DI NG N1M's CREATION Equipped with the nimblewright detector, the characters can search for Nim's escaped creation. A ward-by-ward search is the best approach, but let the players tell you how their characters conduct the search. Depending on where they go, the search could take days. A character mounted on a griffon can complete a city-wide search in a couple of hours. To secure the use of a griffon, a character must either be a member of the Order of the Gauntlet on good terms with Savra Belabranta or a member of the Lords' Alliance on good terms withjalester Silvermane. As it happens, a young griffon named Bonesnapper is being trained to serve as a mount in the Griffon Cavalry. If Savra or jalester is inclined to help the party, the characters can arrange to meet the gr iffon and its trajner outside the R iver Gate the following morning shortly after dawn. (The griffon and its trainer normally reside in Peaktop Aerie atop Mount Waterdeep, but most civilians aren't welcome there.) To gain Bonesnapper's trust, a character must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom (Animal Handling) check. The griffon won't allow any character who fails the check to ride it. Nim's errant nimblewright is in Gralhund Villa on Saerdoun Street, in the North Ward. It isn't, however, the only nimblewright to be found outside the House of Inspired Hands . If the characters decide to search the Dock Ward, the nimblewright detector starts to whir when it comes within range of a couple of the ships in port.

### Dock Ward Distraction

Zardoz Zord, owner of the Sea Maidens Faire, has brought his three ships to Waterdeep. Two of these gal leons, the Heartbreaker and the Hell raiser, are docked. Zord's flagship, the Eyecatcher, is anchored in Deepwa ter Harbor . Each of the three ships (described in chapter 7) has at least one nimblewr ight aboard. The docks are bustling and chaotic during the day, except in winter. At night, darkness provides sufficient cover for characters to approach the docked vessels unseen. If one or more characters are caught aboard a ship, the crew tries to corner them until the shjp's cap tain can have words with them. The nimblewrights, they say, are "attractions and nothing more." If the characters ask to speak to the owner of the fleet, a sending spell is used to contact Zord, who invites the characters to dine with him aboard the Eyecatcher. Dining with Zardo z Zord. Characters who accept Zord's offer are shuttled by dinghy to his flagship, welcomed aboard by drow crew members magically disguised as attractive humans (see chapter 7 for more information). and led to the captain's dining cabin (areajlO):

## Page 50

The dining cabin is bedecked with golden filigree, the purple curtains festooned with silken tassels, the wood paneling scented with perfume. A magnificent feast laid out on golden platters sprawls atop a mahogany table of exquisite craftsmanship. Even the doilies are something to behold. Standing behind it all with wine glass in hand is a well-built, scantily clad man, his scarlet apparel de signed to accentuate his trim figure and bountiful chest hair. A Aashy rapier hangs from his stylish belt. "Welcome aboard the fyecatcher," he says, Aashing his pearly white teeth. "Zardoz Zord. at your service." This dashing figure is none other than j arlaxle Baenre (see appendix B) magically disguised as Zardoz Zord. The characters have piqued Jarlaxle's curiosity. He doesn't know much about them (yet) and wants to de termine whether they pose a threat {they don't). To win them over, he shares the following information over din ner and wine: • The Sea Maidens Faire, owned and operated by Zord, is a seafaring carnival based in Luskan that travels along the Sword Coast. It provides good, wholesome entertainment in the form of fantastic street parades. • The Heartbreaker and the Hell raiser are used to transport entertainers, wagons, and parade floats. The Eyecatcher is Zord's command ship and private yacht. All three ships are built for comfort and speed. • Zord visits the distant island of Lantan about once a year. During his last visit, he purchased four nim blewrights from a Lantanese wizard. He keeps two aboard bis flagship, and one aboard each of the other two vessels. • When they're not marching in a parade, Zord's nimblewrights remain aboard his ships. "They're perfectly harmless, " he attests, whereupon a nimblewright holding a decanter enters the dining cabin and quietly refills everyone's wine glasses. If the characters mention the Stone of Golorr, Zord shrugs his shoulders in a manner that suggests he doesn't know what they're talking about. He also feigns disinterest in Waterdeep politics, saying, "Every city has problems, l suppose. My job as an entertainer is to make people forget about politics for a while." Char acters who are suspicious of Zord can make a DC 24 Wisdom (Insight) check . Any character who succeeds on the check senses that there's much more to him than meets the eye. Jarlaxle owns a hat of disguise but doesn't need it to hide his true form while he's aboard any of his ships. His disguise (and the disguises of his drow subordi nates) can be dispelled only by destroying the ship's figurehead (see chapter 7). If the characters somehow discern his true form,Jarlaxle gives the party a slow nod of his head, dryly says "Bravo!" and lets them make the next move. When dinner is concluded, Zord bids the characters farewell and sees that they are escorted safely back to the docks.

### Drow Characters

If the adventuring party includes one or more drow characters, Captain Zord pays close attention to what they do and say, but doesn't treat them any differently from the other party members.

### What Rena Er K Nows

At some point during their investigation, the characters might want to speak to Renaer Neverember about the fireball, given his own recent brush with the Zhentarim. Conversely, he could decide to pay them a visit at their tavern. If he's told that a gnome and two Zhents were killed in the blast, Renaer drops a bombshell: "When the Lords ofWate rdeep ousted my father, I thought his long, dark shadow was finally gone for good. The truth is, I want nothing to do with him. But his spies hound me. One of them, a gnome named Dalakhar, had been watching me for months. Then, about two tendays ago, the spy was suddenly nowhere to be seen. My father didn't trust many people, but he trusted that gnome. "I spoke to a few of Dalakhar's friends. Apparently, he was on a special mission to retrieve the Stone of Golorr and was afraid that the Zhentarim and the Xanathar Guild were close to catching him. When he heard about my kidnapping, he wanted more information about the adventurers who had rescued me. I think Dalakhar was planning to pay you to deliver the Stone of Colorr to my father in Neverwinter." Any attempt to follow up with Dalakhar's friends proves futile, since they have gone into hiding in the wake of the gnome's sudden demise . If the characters tell Renaer that Fala Lefaliir saw a man fleeing Trollskull Alley (see "Eyewitnesses," page 45), Renaer reaches out to his friends in the Harpers. A day later, he returns with the following information: The man Fala saw matches the description ofUrstul Floxin, a suspected member of the Black Network. • Another North Ward resident claims he saw Urstu l enter Gralhund Villa, in the North Ward, shortly after the fireball incident. The resident reported him to the City Watch because Urstul looked suspicious. • Two City Watch constables spoke to Lord Gralhund. He assured them that no one had broken into the estate and that everything was fine. The constables had no grounds to get a search warrant, so they didn't pursue the matter. CHAPTE R 3 I fl R£BA ll.

## Page 51

### Gralhund Villa

After fleeing Trollskull Alley with the Stone ofGolorr in his clutches, the Zhent assassin Urstul Floxin returned to Gralhund Villa to confront Yalah Gralhund about sending the oimblewright to meddle in his mission. Lady Gralhund decides she no longer likes Urstul and, laking advantage of his injuries, wrests the Stone of Golorr from him at swordpoint and orders her gua rds to lock him up until she decides what to do with him. Your choice of main villain determines Lady Gral hund's motivation, which is a secret held by her and Hrabbaz, her loyal half-ore bodyguard: • ff Xanathar is the main villain, Yalah Gralhund has se cretly cut a deal with the beholder crime lord, offering to return the Stone ofGolorr to it if the beholder helps her create a vacancy on the council of Masked Lords. • ff the Cassalanters are the main villains, Yalah is a fawning member of their Asmodeus-worship ing cult and intends to deliver the Stone ofGolorr to them as a demonstration of her fealty and friendship. ff Jarlaxle is the main villain, he and Yalah are secret lovers. He has promised to facilitate her rise in power after he uses Lord Neverember's lost hoard to buy Luskan's way into the Lords' Alliance. • IfManshoon is the main villain, he promised not to destroy Yalah's family if she allowed her villa to be used as a staging area for his secret plots. Believing that Urstul Floxin is after the gold for himself, Yalah plans to cut Urstul out of the dea l and deliver the Stone ofGolorr to Manshoon herself. Having gravely misjudged and underestimated Lady Grall1und once, Urstul isn't about to do so again. Ral lying despite his injuries, he manages to kill the two inattentive Gralhund guards who were watching over him and alert the other Zhents on the estate. who begin dispatching the other guards and servants. Urstul's goal is to capture Lord or Lady Gralhund, force the surren der of the Stone ofGolorr, and deliver it to his master Manshoon in Kolat Towers (described in chapter 8). Urstul's plans - unbeknownst to him- are dashed when Lady Gralhund orders her nimblewright to take the Stone of Golorr elsewhere. Amid the chaos, the nim blewright flees the estate.

### Should Th Ey Or Should N'T They?

The characters must proceed carefully, since they have no evidence that directly implicates the Gralhunds in the attack in Trollskull Alley. Their two basic choices arc to share what they know with the City Watch or to visit Gralhund Villa themselves.

### Let The Watch H Andle It

The characters can go to any City Watch station in the North Ward and report what they have learned to the constables there. Shortly thereafter, the characters receive a visit from Barnibu s Blastwind and Saeth Croml ey (see appendix B), who have no reason to sus pect the characters are lying. Their own investigation corroborates much of what the characters said. Barni bus concludes the meeting by saying, rather brusquely, CHAPTrR 3 I FIREBALL "Thank you for the information." Cromley adds, "Rest assured, we'll have this case resolved in no time." A magistrate provides the City Watch with a warrant to search Gralhund Villa. Sometime afterward, Cromley visits the characters by himself and, as a courtesy, tells them what happened: • Officers arrived to find Lord Gralhund unconscious, Lady Gra lhund in shock, and their half-ore bodyguard bloodied but unbowed. • Apparently, the Gralhunds had been held hostage for more than a tenday by agents of the Black Network. Most of the Zhents were killed during a bloody revolt led by Lord Gralhund himself. The Zhent leader, Urstul Floxin , was among those who got away. He·s still at large. The Watch plans to step up its search for him. Of the nimblewright, there was no sign. According to the Gralhunds, the construct was delivered to Gralhund Villa weeks earlier. The family took it in, not realizing it was a Zhentarim spy. Lady Gralhund reported that it stole her necklace of fireballs. Cromley's summary of events is based on information given to the City Watch by the Gralhunds and is riddled with falsehoods. The hostage situation. Lord Gralhund's heroism. and the theft of Lady Gralhund's necklace of fireballs never happened. The nimblewright's affiliation with the Zhentarim is also a lie. The Gralhunds' account further doesn't explain why the nimblewright would use the necklace of fireballs to inflict harm on the Zhents if it was working with them. If characters raise that ques tion, Cromley thinks for a moment and then ventures the guess that the nimblewright underestimated the necklace's explosive power.

### Investigate The Villa

The characters can insert themselves into Gralhund Villa and accost its residents with impunity if they're careful to pin the violence on the Zhents or if they're able lo enter and leave unseen before the City Watch shows up to arrest everyone. Sneaking in or out of the villa without being seen or heard by neighbors and passersby requires each char acter to succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity (Stealth) check. A character who has proficiency in the Stealth skill can take disadvantage on the check to grant advantage on another party member's check (essentially compensat ing for a less stealthy companion). If the characters side with the Gralhunds in the con flict, Lady Gralhund is inclined to overlook their tres pass. Her demeanor sours, however, if they start asking too many questions. She vigorously denies accusations that her family is involved with the Black Network and claims the Zhe nts were holding her family hostage (a false claim also parroted by her husband, her body guard, her children, and her staff). If the characters as sault any member of the household or brandish weapons in an attempt to intimidate, the Gralhunds inform the City Watch of the party 's crimes. During the characters' invasion of Gralhund ViJla. the nimblewright flees the estate with the Stone ofGo/orr (see chapter 4 for more information on its destination). If

## Page 52

l1t·l111·lh1 G17 G13

### G15A

### I G16

### G15B G18 G19

Upper Floor G11 lh1• j\1 }\l1• - UptoareaG13 G10 GB G9 G19 Up to area G19 )Y

### - G7

.. G6 1 square = 5 feet G4 '·· •• . .. • ...... Ground Floor . .. · .· .. ........ G3 --'-- --~ C liAl"TF.R 3 H P.EllALL

## Page 53

the characters are using Nim's nimblewright detector to track the nimblewright, the device lets them know that the nimblewright has fled the scene, but not the direc tion it went.

### O Ve Rvi Ew

Gralhund Villa sits in the middle of an upper-class resi dential neighborhood in the North Ward. Here are some general facts to keep in mind: • The streets around the villa have pedestrians and coaches traveling along them at all hours, though traf fic is heavier during the day. • The estate is enclosed by 12-foot-high stone walls that require a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check to negotiate without the aid of climbing gear or magic. • Neighbors and bystanders alert the City Watch if they hear loud, disturbing noises (such as a thunderwave spell) coming from the estate or if they see anything suspicious. The Watch sends a mage and six veterans (one sergeant and five constables) to investigate, and it takes ld6 + 4 minutes for this force to arrive. • All ceilings in the mansion are 20 feet high.

### E Nc O Unte Rs In The V I Lla

The following encounter locations, keyed to map 3.1, describe the Gralhund estate as it stands when the char acters fi rst arrive. The Zhents have taken over the down stairs level of the mansion; the Gralhunds are fighting to hold the upsta irs. Gl. LOCKED GATES Through a set of ornate iron gates, the characters can see a yard with several large trees, as well as two foot paths that lead to a two-story brick mansion and east ward toward a detached coach house. An arcane lock spell is cast on the gates. Forcing them open requires a successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics) check , while picking the lock requires a successful DC 20 Dexterity check using thieves' tools. The spell doesn't bar members of the Gralhund family, their staff, their guards, or Lady Gralhund's nimblewr ight from opening the gates.

### G2. Yard

The estate is well tended. In spring and summer, large trees provide shade. The trees begin shedding leaves in the fall. By winter, their branches are stripped bare. Balcony. Through the trees, the characters can see a large balcony (area G17) enclosed by an iron railing above the mansion's main entrance. The balcony is 20 feet above ground level, and scaling the mansion's brjck walls to reach it without the aid of climbing gear or magic requires a successful DC 15 Strength (Athlet ics) check. Evil Groundskeeper. The yard is looked after by a menacing groundskeeper named Hurv Taldred (LE male Illuskan cult fana tic) and his two quiet mastiffs . The Gralhunds paid a necromancer to perform a ritual on Hurv and his mastiffs. After sundown, the physical forms of these figures melt away, and they become three s hadows until dawn. Characters who succeed on a DC

### Chapter 3 I Fireball

13 Dexter ity (Stealth) check can cross the yard without being detected. Otherwise, Hurv and his hounds detect the characters and attack, day or night.

### G3. Coach House

This stone building contains a beautifully maintained coach and clean stables that house four draft horses and Lady Gralhund'sjet-b lack rid ing horse, named Maladar. A sliding wooden door bars access to the street and has a padlock on the outside that holds it shut. Picking the lock requires a successful DC 20 Dex terity check using thieves' tools. The larger room north of the stables contains tack and harness for each horse, as well as bales of hay and yard tools . The smaller room in the northwest corner has two cots: one for the groundskeeper, Hurv (see area G2), who sleeps during the day, and one for a stableboy named Ike (commoner ), who sleeps here at night. Ike is away (either picking up food for tl1e horses or out drink ing with friends) if the characters arrive during the day. Treasure . Lady Gralhund's horse is outfitted with horseshoes of speed and two saddlebags, each of which holds four 5-pound gold trade bars worth 250 gp each.

### G4. Guard Barracks

This one-story stone building attached to the mansion serves as quarters for twenty house guards. The main room contains ten bunk beds. Each comes with a pair of footlockers containing folded clothes and worthless personal effects. The room in the northwest corner contains wooden mannequins and racks designed to hold armor and weapons. Since there are no guards present, the manne quins and racks are bare.

### G5. Kitchen

An unlocked wooden door leads from the yard to the mansion's kitchen, which is stocked with cookware and utensils. A large fireplace is used for cooking meals.

### G6. Pantry

This pantry is lined with shelves containing dry food stuffs, spices, folded tablecloths, and jars of preserves. Casks of fresh water, ale, and wine are also stored here. Barr ed Door. A back door leads out to the street. This sturdy wooden door is barred shut on the inside. Forc ing it open from the outside requires a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check and makes a lot of noise. Corpses . The Zhents have killed two servants, an older male human (the head butler) and a younger male halfting (a cook), and left their bodies on the floor.

### G7. Laundry Room

This room is where servants wash clothing. It con tains scrub buckets , wash basins. soap , mops, and chamber pots. Corpses. The Zhents have killed a servant, a mid dle-aged female human (the head maid), and left her body on the stairs leading up to the servants' quarters (area G19). The maid has a ring of keys on her belt that opens all the locked doors in the mansion as well as the cabinets in area G8.

## Page 54

### G8. Great Hall

Characters who enter this hall for the first time notice the following: • The floor is strewn with bodies. Two thug s holding bloody maces stand over them. • The sound offighting can be hea rd com ing from the top of a wide staircase in the northwest corner (see area G13). Two iron chandeliers hang from the dark mahogany ceiling above a long dining table carved from red larchwood. Chairs s urround the table, with a parti cu larly tall and elaborate cha ir at eac h end. • Lining the wood-paneled walls are tapestries and locked wooden cabinets that contain fine dish es, sil verware, and cand lesticks. • A fireplace with a black marble mantelpiece has a framed family portrait mounted above it. (The portrait depicts Lord and Lady Gralhund, their three young children, and a family dog that died three years ago.) Corpses. Lying about the room are the bodies of eight guards wearing bloody and tattered House Gralhund livery over their chain shi rts, as well as two dead Zhents in black leather armor. All are humans. Thuts. The two figures with maces are Zhents clad in black leather armor. Their orde rs are to hold the room. They attack strangers, including members of the City Watch, on sight. They carry no treasure.

### G9. Parlor

Urstul Floxin was confined here when he returned to the villa, but shortly thereafter he killed his guards and escaped. The room is furnished for comfort and con tains dainty chairs, a chaise longue, a wine cabinet, and framed paintings of various long-dead members of the Gralhund family. Corpses. The bodies of the two guards lie atop blood soa ked rugs. The guards wear chain shirts and the liv ery of House Gralhund. GlO. DEN AND TROPHY ROOM Lord Gralhund's den has the heads of various beasts mounted on the walls and gleaming suits of armor sta nding at attention in the corners. Bearskin rugs and overstuffed cha irs fill che room. Lord Gralhund recently took up falconry as a hobby. In the middle of the room, resting on a table, is a cage containing a hooded falcon (use hawk sta tistics).

### Gi I. Orond'S Study

The door to this room is locked. The lock can be picked by a character who makes a s uccess ful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves' tools. The room has these features: • A 10-foot-square canvas wrestling mat is sprawled on the floor in the middle of the room. • Velvet armchairs, sma ll statues of naked men on ped estals, and tall mahogany bookshelves are arrang ed neatly around the room. • A mahogany desk in one corner doesn't look like it sees much use. Books. Most of the books are fake boxes made of painted cardboard. A few have bawdy drawings and sa lacious poems hidden inside them. Gl2. FAMILY LIBRARY The wood-paneled librar y includes these features: • Tall bookshelves are packed with tomes. Sliding wooden ladders mounted on rails allow easy access to higher shelves. In one corner stands an iron lectern with a closed, locked, leather -bound tome resting on it. • Two padded chairs face a large fireplace. One has a wolf skin draped over it. Books . Many of the books were handed down to Lady Gralhund by her parents, and they are well kept. They include historical texts, play scrip ts, novels, and poetry collect ions. Lock ed Tome. Although it looks like it might be a spellbook, the tome on the lectern is a chronicle of the Gralhund family's accomplishments, embellished or recast to paint the family in the most favorable light. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of abjuration magic emanating from the tome. The tome is meant to be unlocked using a key that Lady Gralhund wear s on a chain around her neck. The lock can be picked by a charac ter who succeeds on a DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves' tools, or it can be opened with a knock spell or similar magic. Opening the book by any mean s other than using the proper key causes three specters to appear within 10 feet of the book and attack its opener. The magic that binds the spec ters has weakened over time; they ca n exist on the Material Plane for only J minute, after which time they are banished to the Ethereal Plane (unless destroyed first). The specters manifest as ghostly tiefiiogs with elongated fingers. The Gralbund family crest appears on the book's title page. The rest of the book is written in Commo n and de scribes births , death s, and other family events between J 239 DR, the Year of the Bloodied Sword, and 1422 DR, the Year of Advancing S hadows. Of particular note is the little-known fact that the Gralhunds forged pacts with devils in yea rs past, giving rise to a strain of tief lings. All such members of the house were sent to live on a Gralhund estate in Yartar, a city far to the north (or so the book claims in its epilogue), and there are pass ing references to some Waterdavian family members having been born with tails. Gl3. UPSTAIRS FOYER A lot is happening in this elegant foyer: • A battle rages between severa l Zhents and house guards , and the floor is strewn with dead bodies. • Doors to the mast er bedroom (area G16) stand open. (If Lady Gralhund is in the master bedroom, she shouts, "The City Watch is on the way!") • The door to area Gl5a is ajar. Beyond it, chara cters can hear someone putting a boot to another door. Corpses. Lying on the floor are the corpses and weap ons of six guards wearing House Gralhund livery over chain shirts and two Zhents in black leather armor.

### Chapter 3 I Fireba Ll

## Page 55

### Urstul Floxin

Fight in Progress. Four veteran s of House Gralhund (each with 30 hit points remaining) are fighting off an attacking force of Zhents consisting of three thugs (each with 20 hit points remaining). The Zhents are trying to get to area G16, but the guards are blocking them. If the characters do nothing to affect the outcome of this fight, assume that it ends with three House GraJ hund veterans still alive and all the Zhents dead. Gl4. BALLROOM The door to this room is locked. A character using thieves' tools can pick the lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. The ballroom is unoccupied and con tains the following features: • Gilded mirrors, tasseled tapestries, and stained-glass lamps festoon the walls. Mounted above a fireplace is a stag's head made of blown glass. • The veined marble floor is polished to a mirror like sheen. • Tacky crystal chandeliers dang le from the ceiling, which has a mural depicting an orgy painted on it. Gl5. GUEST SUITE Until recentJy, this suite was set aside for the use of Urstul Floxin. Lord Gralhund has barricaded himself in area GlSb. using heavy furniture to block the door. Forcing it open requires a successful DC 18 Strength (Athletics) check. The characters encounter UrstuJ Floxin (see ap pendix B) in area GlSa. Urstul is wounded with 50 hit CHAPTER 3 I F'l.REnALl. points remaining and has no poison coati ng his weap ons, reducing his challenge rating to 3 (700 XP). He's trying to kjck open the door to area GlSb in a desperate attempt to capture Lord Gralhund and trade him for the Stone of Golorr. If he is accosted before reaching Lord Gralhund, Urstul tries to flee the villa and uses any other surviving Zbents to cover his escape. He knows the sa me information that Lord Gralhund does (see "Orond Gralhund" below) but won't divulge it or the name of his maste r, Manshoon, unless he's magically compelled to do so. Area GlSa is a bathroom. A curtain to the east has been drawn back. revealing a claw-footed bathtub. Area Gl Sb is a wood-paneled bedchamber with a bird cage on a table and a permanent teleportation circle in scribed on the floor. The birdcage contains three flying s nakes that Urstul uses to deliver messages to his spies throughout the city. The circle is used by Manshoon to meet secretly with Urstul Floxin and to teleport Zhents to and from Kolat Towers (see chapter 8). See the tele portation circle spell description in the Player's Hand book for more information on how the circle functions. Orond Gralhund . Having blocked the bedroom door with a wardrobe, a desk, and an overstuffed chair, Orond Gralhund (see appendix B) cowers behind a bed in the southwest corner of area GlSb. Although he's armed with a rapier , Orond throw s hjmself at the mercy of the first person to bust through his barricade. Characters who have Lord Gralhund at their mercy ca n pry the following information from him with a

## Page 56

successful DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check, but the check is made with disadvantage if Lord Gralhund has reason to believe his wife can see or overhear the conversation: "The Stone ofGolorr is some kind of ancient creature transformed into an artifact. It knows the location of a hidden vault in Waterdcep containing half a mil lion dragons ." • "House Gralhund has been bankrolling Black Net work operations in Waterdeep, including the plot to kidnap Renaer Neverember and the plot to steal the Stone ofGolorr from his father's gnome spy, Dalakhar." • "My wife was frustrated with the Zhents and their inability to secure the artifact. She gave a necklace of fireballs to her mechanical servant and sent it out to help retrieve the stone. It was careless and caught the Zhents in the fireball by mistake." Gl6. MASTER BEDROOM The doors to this room have been thrown open. The room contains the following occupants and features: • Yala b Gralhund , wearing a breastplate and armed with a rapier, stands next to her well-dressed half orc bodyguard. Hra bba z (see appendix B for their statistics). • A locked wooden trunk rests at the foot of a large, can opied bed in the southwest corner. • A claw-footed bathtub sits in the northwest alcove near a freestanding mirror and a pr ivacy screen. Hanging above a fireplace in the southeast corner is a shield that bears the Gralhund coat of arms. Logs are stacked neatly next to the hearth. • A tall mahogany wardrobe stuffed with expensive gowns and dress clothes stands next to a pair of open glass doors leading out to a balcony. Yaish Gralhund. Lady Gralhund gave the Stone of Golorr and a map of where to take it to her nimblewright servant, who has left the villa by the time the characters reach this chamber. Its escape is crucial, since it sets into motion the events in chapter 4. Lady Gralhund and Hrabbaz are the only people who know where the nimblewright has gone, but they feign ignorance when questioned about it. Yalah carries a ring of keys that open alJ locked doors in the mansion, as well as the locked wooden trunk at the foot of the bed. If her situation turns dire and Hrab baz is unable to protect her, Yalah unlocks the door to area Gl8, rushes inside, and locks the door behind her with her next action. She makes her final stand there, with her children cowering behind her. Wooden Trunk . The lock on the trunk can be picked with thieves' tools and a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. The trunk appears to contain folded clothes and shoes. A secret compartment in the bottom can be detected by someone who examines the outside of the trunk and makes a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Percep tion) check. The compartment holds two holy symbols of Asmodeus and two robes, each red and gold in color. Lord and Lady GraJhund are both secret members of a cult of Asmodeus worshipers popular among select no bles in Waterdeep. The cult is led by Lord Victoro Cas salanter (see appendix B). though the Gralhunds won't divulge this informatio n willingly. Gl7. BALCONY Th is large balcony is enclosed by an ornate wrought iron railing and has lounge cha irs neat ly arra nged on it. The ground is 20 feet below, and open glass doors lead to the master bedroom (area GJ6). Gl8. CHILDREN'S ROOM The door to this room is locked. The lock can be picked with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves· tools. Three beds line the south wall, and an empty cradle rests against the east wall. Other furnishings include squat wardrobes, play rugs, and children's desks. Childr en. Confined here for their safety are the Gral hunds' two youngest children, a 13-year-old boy named Zartan and a 10-year-old boy named Greth. Both are noncombatants. Their 18-year -old sister, Tomassin, is visiting a tiefling cousin in Yartar. Gl9. SERVANTS' W I NG Three rooms in the southeast area of the upper floor are where the servants sleep al night. The head butler and head maid have rooms to themselves, but those places are currently unocc upied. The largest of the three cham bers is a commo n room containing six bunk beds for the junior staff. A tota l of nine maids, cooks, a nd valets (commoner s) are holed up here, wa iting for someone to rescue them. They are armed with improvised weap ons {rolling pins, mops, brooms , and the like) that are treated as clubs.

### Aftermath

After fleeing Gralhund Villa with the Stone ofGolorr, Lady Gralhund's nimblewright hides the artifact in a secret location in Waterdeep. setting the stage for chapter 4. Even if the bloody con flict at Gralhund Villa goes unnoticed outside the walls of the estate, the carnage can't be hidden from the City Watch for long. There are too many murdered servants and guards for anyone to conceal what has tra nspired. The arrival of the City Watch foreshadows the return of Barnibus Blastwind and Saeth Cromley (see appendix 8), who arrive in due course with twenty constables (veterans) and two Grif fon Cavalry riders (see appendix B) astride griffons . The griffons and their riders remain airborne, providing aerial support and reco nnaissance. Barnibus thoroughly investigates the Gralhund Villa crime scene and questions neighbors and bystande rs. Characters who are seen leaving the scene become sus pects. If the characters killed any members of the Gral hund family and left witness es or evidence of the act, Barnibus instructs Sergeant Cromley to arrest them for the crime of murdering a noble. which carries a death sentence if they're found guilty.

### Chapter 3 I Firebal L

## Page 57

### Loos E E Nds

You can use the following optiona l even t to address what happ ens to the Zhentarim in the aftermath. B AD nME To BE A ZHENT Within days after the events that local broadsheets dub the "Gra lhund Villa Bloodbath," the City Watch cracks down on the Black Netwo rk. Even members of the Zhentarim who have no known criminal ties a re round ed up and inter rogated, including Davi! Starsong (see appendix B). Characters who are members of the faction are safe for the time being, as long as they keep a low profile. Otherwise, they too are rounded up and questioned over a period of seve ral days. until the Lords of Waterdeep ascertain their level of involvement in the violence at Gralhund Villa. The broadsheets jump on the bandwagon by portraying the Black Network in the most unflattering light, thus dealing a cripplin g blow to the faction 's already questionable reputation.

### Encounter With !Strid Horn

This encounte r occurs only if the characte rs were di rectly involved in the events that transpired at Gra lhund Villa. After Davit Starsong is taken in for questioning , l strid Horn (see appendix B) sends a message to the cha racte rs by way of a Oying snake. The message, writ ten in Common, reads as follows: I would like to know more about what happened at Gral· hund Villa. If you can spare the time, meet me at Ahghai ron's Statue in the City of the Dead at highsun tomorrow. You'll be paid generously for your time and trouble. - lstrid Horn If the characte rs attend the meeting, use the following boxed text to help set the scene, e mbellishing it to reflect the season: Ahghairon's Statue is a well-known landmark in the city's parkland cemetery: a tall, marble sculpture of a bearded. robed wizard standing atop concentric steps and facing west toward the skyline ofWaterdeep, his hands out· stretched and a broad smile on his face. At the foot of the statue stands a female dwarf clad in plate armor. If the weather is fair, characters can see pedes trian s, picnickers, and frolicking childr en throughout the cem-

### Chapter 3 I Fireball

etery grounds. It's clear that Istrid chose a safe , public place for the meeting. Characters who succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom (Insig ht) chec k can tell that she came alone. Istrid fears being arrested by the City Watch. Although she wasn't involved in the matters concerning Gralhund Villa, s he is worried that the Watch will uncover her illegal cur rency-lending operation in the cou rse of its investigations. She offers the characters 10 pp just for meeting with her and promises another 40 pp if the charac ters agree to help her lie low for a tenday-half to be paid once a deal is struck and half at the end of her stay. If they decline her offer and the party includes one or more Zhentarim members, she threatens that if she's arrested and charged with a crime, she will reveal their affiliation and bring them down with her. Hiding Istrid. If the charac ters decide to let Istrid bide out at their tavern, she uses a disguise kit to make herself up to be a male dwarf named Jorn. If asked to do so, she's willing to perform chores around the place once she settles in. Ultimately, no one comes looking for her, but the longer she stays hidden , the more testy and demanding she becomes. Jf the characters tolerate her bad behavior, Istrid leaves at the end of the tenday as promised and pays characters the remainder of what she owes. Characters who are members of the Zhentarim gain an added bene fit for harboring Istrid in her time of need: their renown in the faction increases by 2. If, on the other hand, the characters throw her out or rat her out to the City Watch, Istrid becomes their mor tal enemy and tries to undermin e them at every turn. Harming Istrid. As a precaution against being dou ble-crossed, lstrid shared her plan concerning the characters with at least one other member of the Doom Raiders (see appendix B). If the characters betray or harm Istrid, her former adventuring companions use every resource at their disposal to ruin the characters. The laws of Waterdeep discoura ge them from attacking the characters open ly, but they can damage the party's business by scaring off their clientele, and characters might find themselves the targets of worse if they dare to leave the confines of the city.

### Level Advancement

If you're leveling up characters using story milestones instead of tracking experience points, the characters ad vance from 3rd to 4th level if they conducted their own investigation into the fireball incident and affected the outcome of events in Gralhund Villa. Otherwise, they are still 3rd level at the sta rt of chapter 4.
