# Chapter 2: Trollskull Alley

_Source pages: 32-43_

## Page 32

### Rollskull Alley Is Filled With Peopl E

who can shape the characters' day-to-day lives in Waterdeep. The characte rs will likely return to Trollskull Alley many times durin g the adventure and get to know their neighbors as time passes. The locations described below are keyed to the map ofTrol lskull Alley (map 2.1, page 33). Buildings not specifica lly identified on the map are row houses that serve as private residences for upper -mid dle class Waterdavians who can afford housekeepers. groundskeepers, and nannies. T l. TROLLSKULL MANOR See appendix C for a handout showing the floor plan of this building. Give a copy of this handout to your players as their characters begin to explore Trollskull Manor. Four stories tall and boasting balconies, a turret, and five chimneys, the abandoned building is one of the grandest in Trollskull Alley. Characters can refurnish, rebuild, renam e, and otherwise personalize their new strongho ld to their hearts' contenl.

### Tavern Room S

When the char acters first arrive, the tavern's taproom is filled with broken furniture, tarnished silver ware. casks of wine that have turned to vinegar. and worthless detri tus. The tavern's other rooms are all empty, except for cobwebs, dust, and harmless rats.

### Spirit On Tap

The former tavern is haunted by the poltergeist (spec ter) of the tavern's previous barkeeper, a half-elf named Lif. Maintaining the tavern was his life's work. and he couldn't abandon the place in death. The poltergeist understands Common and Elvish, but it can't speak. ll invisibly causes mischief at the expense of the new owners by smashing plates, breaking beer barrels , and so forth. If the characters don't take the hint, it writes not-so-subtle warning s (such as "Closing time!" and "Last call!") on dusty floors and grimy win dows. To truly claim the tavern as their own, the charac ters must eithe r appease the poltergeist or destroy it. Appea sing Lif. If the characters work to repair and renovate the tavern with the goal of opening it to the public again, the poltergeist begins to accept them as the new owners and gradually becomes quite accom modating: pulling out a chair when a cha racter wants to sit down , pouring a beer and delivering it to a character, taking coats when folks come in from the rain, and so forth. Once the business is up and running, Lif can also perform other helpful functions, such as locking doors , sweeping floors, and so forth. Destro ying Lif. Li f's poltergeist is destroyed if its hit points are reduce d to 0. If attacked, it flees to the up permost level of the turr et when red uced to half its hit points. From there it fights to the bitter end.

### Chapter 2 I Trollskull Alu ' Y

## Page 33

### T2. The B Ent Nail

A small wooden sign above this shop's main door is bare except for a large, bent nail sticking out of it. The front room contains displays of ornate wooden furn iture, as well as a selection of bows and crossbows . The wall behind the counte r is lined with rows of finely carved wooden canes, quarterstaffs, and shields. Talisolvanar "Tally" Fellbranch, the owner and chie f artisan of the Bent Nail, is a male half-elf carpenter and woodcarver. He is a commone r, with these changes: • Tally is chaotic good. • He has these racial traits: He has advantage on saving throws against being charmed, and magic can't put him to sleep. He has darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. He speaks Common and Elvish .

### Services

Tally sells wooden weapons and sh ields at norma l cost. He also crafts and sells furniture and wood sculptures.

### T 3. Steam And Steel

During daylight hours, smoke and steam billow from the many windows around this indoor forge where metal weapons, armor , and tools are made . The forge is owned and operated by a married couple: a fire genas i named Embric and a water genasi named Avi. Both are members of the Most Careful Order of Skilled Smiths and Metalfo rgers. As an armorer, Avi also belongs to the Splendid Order of Armorers, Locksmiths, and Finesmiths. Embric tends the forge and is an expert weaponsm ith. He claims descent from the efreet of Calimshan and is prone to extreme mood swings. He has the stat istics of a bandit captain , with these changes: Embric is neutral good. He has these racial traits: He can cast produce flame at will. (Constitution is his spellcasting ability, and he has a +4 bonus to hit with spell attacks .) He has darkvision out to a range of 60 feet and resistance to fire damage. He speaks Common and Primordial. Avi worships Eldath, god of peace, and uses his magic to quench hot steel. He is an expert armo rsmith. Avi is laid back and speaks plainly. He has the stat istics of a pries t, with these changes: Avi is neutral good . • He has these racia l traits: At will, he can control the flow and shape of water in a 5-foot cube, or cause the water to freeze for up to 1 hour. He has a swimming speed of 30 feet, and he can breathe air and water. He has resistance to acid damage . He speaks Common and Primo rdial.

### Services

The genasi coup le sells all metal weapons, armor, and shields listed in chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook at normal cost.

### Chapter 2 I T.Roi:.Lskull Auey

T4. CoRELLoN's CROWN Fala Lefa liir, an herbalist and a member of the Guild of Apothecaries and Physicians, operates out of this stately, three-story town house, the third floor of which has been converted into a greenhouse. Its translucent glass walls allow anyone on the street to see the rain bow of flowers blossom ing within. Fala Lefaliir is an outgoing wood elf with long, braided hair. Like the elven god Corellon Larethian, Fala is neither male nor female . If referred to as "he" or "she," Fala gently requests to be addressed by name or as "they." Fala is friends with a member of the Zhen tarim named Ziraj, who saved Fala's life. He visits Fala from time to time, and Fala has set aside a room for him on the second floor. Fala is a druid , with these changes: • Fala is chaotic good. • Fala bas these racial traits: Fala has advantage on saving throws against being charmed, and magic can't put Fala to sleep. Fala has a walking speed of 35 feet and darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. Fala speaks Common, Druidic, and Elvish.

### Services

In addition to nonmagical herbal remedies, Fala sells potions of the types listed in the Fa la's Potions table. Fala keeps ld6 vials of each potion in locked cabinets behind the shop counter. fALA ' S POTIONS Pot ion Potion of animal friendship Potion of climbing Potion of greater healing Potion of healing Potion of water breathing

### T5 . Tiger'S Eye

Cost l2S gp so gp 2SO gp so gp 2SO gp This private detective's business is w1remarkable on the outside, its only distinguishing mark an orange and-black sign featuring a cat's eyes. Inside is a regal apartment dimly lit by flickering oil lamps. The door is locked, and visitors must knock or ring the bell before being let in. They are met by Vincent Trench, a human detective and the owner of the Tiger's Eye. He speaks concisely, dresses in a sharp suit, and smokes a slim pipe. Vincent is in fact a raksba s a named Valantajar that always casts disguise self on itself before seeing visitors. The rak shasa has lived in Waterdeep for years. switching iden tities as often as needed to keep its true nature hiden. It has grown accustomed to living among mortals and, much to its own astonishment, is rather fond ofWater deep and its citizens.

### Services

Trench can discover any secret in Waterdeep, for a fee. Use your judgment when pricing its services; 50 gp is sufficient for most investigations , but if the characters want to learn secrets relating to the major antagonists

## Page 34

Northeast l square = l 0 feet \-, -~-,-----;:::\]=~" '\ M11P 2 1: TROLLSKUt.L AL LEV (NORTH W11RO) of this adventure, the rakshasa might require a service in payment, such as slaying enemies that are hunting it, posting advertisements for its business in their tavern, or keeping tabs on someone Vincent has been hired to spy on.

### T6. Book Wyrm'S Treasure ----

The front of this bookstore is adorned with a charming sign of a gold dragon curled around a treasure hoard of books and scrolls. Inside, the shop is decorated with beautiful hardwood, and the earthy scent of old books permeates the air. The library fills two floors of this three-story building, and it somehow seems to contain more shelves than the building should be able to hold. The shop is managed by a short dragonborn of gold dragon ancestry named Rishaal the Page-Turner , who lives on the third floor. Rishaal, a member of the Watch ful Order of Magists and Protectors, is a mage , with these changes: Rishaa l is neutral. • He has these racial traits: He can use his action to ex hale a 15-foot cone of fire (but can't do this again until he finishes a short or long rest); each creatu re in the cone must make a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw, tak ing 2d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. He has resistance to fire damage. He speaks Common, Draconic, Dwarvish, and Elvish.

### Services

The shop contains books of all sorts. In addition, Rish aal has a small collection of spe ll books and allows wizards to copy spells from them at the cost listed in the Spells for Sale table. He can scribe any of these spells as a spell scrol/ but charges twice the listed cost for this service.

### Spells For Sale

Spell Comprehend languages, detect magic, feather fall, find familiar, mage armor, magic missile, shield, unseen servant Arcane lock, continual flame, darkvision, invisibility, magic weapon, misty step, rope trick, suggestion Clairvoyance, counterspell, dispel magic, fireball, fly, nondetection, water breathing Arcane eye.fabricate, greater invisibility, ice storm, locate creature, polymorph Bigby's hand, cone of cold, modify memory

### T7. Sewer Access

Cost per Spell 25 gp 75 gp 150 gp 300 gp 750 gp At the east end ofTrollskull Alley is a removable metal grate that covers an opening. Below the grate, a ladde r descends 20 feet into the Waterdeep sewer system .

### Chapter 2 I Trollskull Alley

## Page 35

### Joinin G Fact Ions

Word begins to spread througho ut Waterdeep that a group of advent urers helped Volothamp Geddarm and resc ued Renaer Neverember. Within days, faction rep resentat ives begin to approach the cha racters and try to recruit them . This book's introduction describes the various factions and what they look for in recru its. The characters need not all join the sa me faction, and some might not want to join a faction at all. A character who belongs to a faction is given a mission upon gainin g a level, from 2nd through 5th level. Com pleting the mission increases that member's renown in the faction. Other characters who aren't faction mem bers can assist in the mission's completion. A character who belongs to a faction other than the Lords' Alliance can turn down a mission without consequence. Each faction has a representative who serves as its primary contact. This NPC delivers mission briefings and dispenses the tangible rewards for completing a

### Br Ega N D'Aer T He Missi O Ns

Party Level 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Mission Brief "I'd like you to steal a silk handkerchief from a Waterdavian noble and give it to a tiefling girl who lives in a crate at the corner of Net Street and Dock Street, by the wharf." "This mission is so easy, a gang of street ur chins could pull it off. I want you to deliver an expose to Gaxly Rudderbust, the publisher of a local broadsheet called The Waterdeep Wazoo, without his knowing who wrote it or where it came from. You'll find his office at the corner of Im mar Street and Stallion Street, in the North Ward. Leave the story on his desk." "We've captured a member of the Xanathar Guild, and I'd like you to guard him for three nights until I or another member of Bregan D'aerthe reclaims him. You'll find him trapped in your basement." "We have a spy deep within Xanathar's orga nization, but I fear he has been compromised. It breaks my heart to do this, but I'm sending you to eliminate him. Make it quick and pain· less, and for Lolth's sake, be discreet."

### Oh Apter 2 I Trollskull Alley

mission. An increase in renown quickly follows. The missions and the manner in which they ca n be com pleted are described in the tables throughout this sec tion. You can use missions from these tables or replace any of them with ones of your own creation. If a mission ends in failure, the characters can try again after 24 hours, unless the failure has created cir cumstances where doing so is impo ssib le.

### Bregan D 'Ae Rthe

If one or more cha ract ers are drow,Jarlaxle Baenre has his lieutenants, three drow gunslingers , shadow these potential new recruits while keeping a safe distance. Fel'rekt Lafeen and Krebbyg Masq'il'yr watch the char acters at night, and Soluun Xibrindas watches them during the day (doing his best to stay out of the sunlight). See appendix B for details on these lieutenants. Cha racters who have a passive Wisdom (Perception) score of 18 or higher see fleeting glimpses of the drow spies over a period of several days and can, with a sue- Mission Requirements and Reward Finding a noble isn't hard, but snatching one's handkerchief without being detected requires a successful DC 12 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. One can also convince a noble to surrender it with a successful DC 12 Charisma (Deception, Intimidation, or Persua sion) check. The tiefling girl in the crate thanks the characters for the hanky. Reward: Each Bregan D'aerthe character gains l renown. )arlaxle has written an expose on devil worship among unnamed Waterdavian noble families. The story mentions orgies and secret deals happening behind closed doors. ()arlaxle never passes up a chance to rattle the nobility and sow political unrest.) A character can break into Gaxly's office while it's closed, either during lunch hour or after hours. Getting in and out without being seen requires two successful DC 15 Dexterity (Stealth) checks, and getting past a locked door requires a successful DC 10 Dexterity check using thieves' tools (or a knock spell or similar magic). Reward: Each Bre· gan D'aerthe character gains l renown. Characters who search the basement of their Trollskull Alley tavern find Ott Steeltoes (see appendix B) bound by iron bands of Bilarro. How he got there is anyone's guess; even he doesn't know. On the first night, Xanathar sends a gang of six bugbears to attack the tav ern and rescue Ott. If the characters have moved Ott elsewhere, the bugbears attack the tavern anyway. On the second night, four mem bers of the Dungsweepers' Guild (commoners) with intellect de vourers in their skulls visit the tavern. They order drinks and scope out the tavern, attacking if they find Ott or leaving if they don't. On the third night, a beholder zombie attacks. After the third attack, Ott disappears as mysteriously as he arrived, along with the iron bands of Bi/arro. Reward: Each Bregan D'aerthe character gains 2 renown. )arlaxle identifies the traitor as a drow mage named Nar'I Xibrindas (see appendix B) and furnishes the characters with a route to Xana thar's lair through underground passageways. (Xanathar's lair is de scribed in chapter 5. Characters who follow )arlaxle's route arrive at area Xl .) Reward: Each Bregan D'aerthe character gains 2 renown. Each party member who contributes to the mission receives a tro phy bearing a gold statuette of )arlaxle (worth 250 gp).

## Page 36

cess ful DC 15 Wisdom (l nsight} check, asce rtain that these s pies are paying particu lar attention to the activi ties of the drow party membe rs.

### Ja Rlaxle B Aenre

If the par ty repo rts the drow to the City Watch,Jarl ax le ends the surveillance a nd brea ks o ff all contact with the charac ters for the time being. On the oth er hand , if the characte rs try to confron t the drow spies, they avoid contac t but leave behind a black eye pat ch as a calling ca rd. The next day,Jarlaxl e Baenre (see app endix B) shows up at the party's headqu arters, using his hat of disguise to appear as a habe rdashe r named J.B. Neverco tt. In this guise, he asks to s peak privately with drow charac ters who he think s might make suitab le Brcga n D'aerthe recruit s. Only drow are given ser ious consideration, butjarl axle doesn't care if they're male or female. As a test , he offers them their first mission. Jarlax le is a cons umm ate actor who never lets down his guard. Even if the cha racters disce rn his true iden tity, he never admits to being anything other than what he pretends to be.

### Em Eral D En Clave Missions

Party Level 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Mission Brief "Outlying farms are being terrorized by a scarecrow come to life. It has slaughtered live· stock, chased horses, and spooked farmers. No people have been killed as yet, so the City Guard is dragging its heels. Something must be done!" "Sir Ambrose Everdawn, a grizzled old cham pion of Kelemvor, has offered to help the City Guard catch a necromancer who's stealing bones from the City of the Dead and animating them as skeletons. Sir Ambrose could use your help, if you're not too busy." "Doppelgangers threaten the balance of power in Waterdeep. Rumor has it a group of them are hiding in the Yawning Portal. Root them out and rid the city of them if you can." "The Xanathar Guild is releasing mons ters to distract the City Watch and the City Guard while its members stir up trouble elsewhere. The authorities are having trouble catching and killing a flying horror known as a grell. This aberration was latest seen snatching up an old woman in the Dock Ward. Unless we intervene, she won't be the last."

### Emerald Enclave

The Emerald Encl ave takes an interest in chara cters who see k to prese rve the bala nce within Waterdeep (pa rticularly clerics of nat ure, drui ds, a nd rang ers). Any s uch chara cter is visited by a white cat that s peaks the following message in a melodious male voice: ! "Interested in joining the Emerald Enclave? Come meet I us at Phaulkonmere in the Southern Ward." The cat is an ordina ry ani ma l upon which an animal messe nger spell was cast. h das hes away afte r deliver ing its invitation.

### M E La Nnor F Ellbra Nch

The chara cters' main contact in the Emerald Enclave is Melanno r Fellbran ch, the friend ly but humo rless grounds keeper of Phau lkonmere, a compo und located one block south of Kolat Towers (see chapter 8). Phau l konmere is owned by the Tarm and Phaulkon noble families. Melann or delivers miss ions by way of animal messe nger spells and is pa rtial to using cats and pi geons as couriers. He quickly ass igns new members their firs t mission. Mission Requirements and Reward Not one but three scarecrows are terrorizing Undercliff. One wears a sackcloth hood, another has a rotting pumpkin head, and the third is covered with a threadbare blanket. Characters who camp in a field for the better part of a day or night have a 10 percent chance of encountering one of the scarecrows. The attacks continue until all three scarecrows are destroyed. Reward: Each Emerald Enclave character gains l renown for ending the threat. Convincing Ambrose Everdawn (LG male human Tethyrian knight) that the party intends to help requires a successful DC 13 Charisma (Persuasion) check. If the check succeeds, Sir Ambrose asks the party to patrol the southern half of the cemetery for ten consecutive nights while he patrols the north half. The characters have a cumu· lative 10 percent chance each night of encountering six skeletons, but the re's no sign of the necromancer who animated them. Once the skeletons are destroyed, no further encounters occur. After a tenday, Sir Ambrose releases the characters from service. Reward: Each Emerald Enclave character gains 1 renown. Each party mem ber who patrolled the cemetery for all ten nights receives 100 gp. The characters need to confront "Bonnie" the doppelganger and, with a successful DC 15 Charisma (Intimidation or Persuasion) check, convince her to leave Waterdeep and take her gang with her. Reward: Each Emerald Enclave character gains 2 renown. Locating the grell requires a successful DC 18 Intelligence (lnves· tigation) check followed by a successful DC 18 Wisdom (Survival) check. Each check, whether successful or not, represent s l hour of gathering information or tracking spoor. In fact, there are two grells. One grell tries to flee if the other is killed. Reward: Each Emerald Enclave character gains 2 renown. )eryth bestows a charm of hero· ism (see "Supernatural Gifts" in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide) on each party member who helped slay the grells.

### Chap I !Or 2 I Trollskull Alle V

## Page 37

Melannor is a half-elf druid , with these changes: Melannor is chaotic good. • He bas these racial traits: He has advantage on saving throws against being charmed, and magic can't put him to sleep. He has darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. He speaks Common and Elvish. j ERYTH PHAU LKON When the characters arrive at Phaulkonmere for the first time, Melannor introduces them to the lady of the estate: a noblewoman-turned-demigod and Chosen of Mielikki namedjeryth Phaulkon.Jeryth, the only mem ber of her family who currently resides at Phaulkon mere, manifests as a disembodied female voice that can be heard by anyone in the villa gardens. She offers mem bership in the enclave and bestows on each new mem ber a charm of restoration (see "Supernatural Gifts" in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). Jeryth also of fers Phaulkonmere as a safe haven for enclave members and their friends . In her disembodied state ,jeryth can't be harmed. If the need arises,Jeryth can cast any spell on the druid

### For Ce Gr Ey (G Ray Hands) Missions

Party level 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Mission Brief "Seek out Hlam, a monk who lives in a cave on the side of Mount Waterdeep . Ask him what he's heard about threats to the city, but try not to annoy him or overstay your welcome." "A young bronze dragon has taken up resi dence in Deepwater Harbor. It startled a few sailors recently but hasn't hurt anyone. Con front the dragon and learn its intentions ." "A member of Force Grey has been acting strangely oflate. His name is Meloon Wardragon, and his happy-go-lucky demea nor has sou red. He's been hanging around the Yawning Portal more than usual. Observe him for a tenday, then report back to me." "Xanathar is using intellect devourers to take control ofWaterdavians in key positions throughout the city. We must deal with this problem at once. Infiltrate Xanathar's lair and destroy whatever is responsible for creating these creatures."

### Chapter 2 I Trollskull Alley

spell list. She uses her spells in defense of her estate and its beautiful gardens. A member of the Emerald Enclave can petitionjeryth to cast a spell, which she is happy to do if that character's renown in the enclave equals or exceeds the spell's level.

### Force Grey (Gray Hands)

The Blackstaff, Vajra Safahr (see appendix B), is friends with Renaer Neverember, and word of his rescue quickly reaches her ears. She uses a sending spell to deliver the following short message to one of the characters: I "I am Vajra Safahr, the Blackstaff. Come to Blackstaff I Tower in the Castle Ward at once. Bring your friends." Despite her insistent tone, Vajra doesn't take offense if the character refuses her invitation. A day later, she casts another sending spell and reaches out to a dif ferent party member. If sbe is refused a second time, she doesn't contact the party again until the characters gain a level. Mission Requirements and Reward Those who climb the mounta inside to reach the cave must succeed on a DC 12 Constitut ion saving throw or arrive with ld4 levels of exhaustion. Trying to get Hlam (see appendix B) to share informa tion requires a DC 12 Charisma (Persuasion) check. If the check succeeds, he tells the cha racters, "Evil's twin hides its face for now. Expect that to change before winter's end." (This is an oblique ref erence to Manshoon.) The characters can descend the mountain safely. Reward: Each Gray Hand character gains 1 renown. Vajra gives each character a potion of water breathing to complete this mission. They find a young bronze dragon, Zelifarn, swimming around a barnacle-covered shipwreck at the bottom of the deep harbor. The friendly dragon tries to coax as much treasure as it can from the characters. Those who converse with Zelifarn can make a DC 13 Wisdom (Insight) check. A successful check reveals that the dragon poses no danger to Waterdeep. If no one succeeds on the check, the dragon's true intentions can't be gleaned. Reward: Each Gray Hand character gains 1 renown. Characters can befriend Meloon Wardragon (see appendix B) or watch him from afar. Each day at dawn, Meloon engages in a tele pathic contest of wills with his magic axe, Azuredge (see appendix A), before leaving his room at the Yawning Portal. The axe wants a new wielder, but Meloon refuses to part with it. Characters who observe Meloon during this exchange can ascertain what's going on with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Insight) check. Reward: Each Gray Hand characte r gains 2 renown. If the characters rid Meloon of the intellect devourer in his skull, Vajra gives the party a wand of secrets. The characters must slay Nihiloor the mind flayer (see appendix B). They can stake out a Xanathar Guild hideout (see chapter 1) and wait for Nihiloor to show up there , or confront the mind flayer in Xanathar's lair (see chapter 5). Reward: Each Gray Hand character gains 2 renown. Every character who participated in the raid re· ceives a potion of resistance. In addition, Vajra covers the cost of any raise dead spells needed to bring back dead characters.

## Page 38

### Vajr A Safa Hr

BlackstaffTowe r is a fortress and a wizard training acade my aJI in one. From here , Vajra Safah r watches over the city and asserts herse lf as Blacksta ff. S ending spells a re her preferred way of com municating with her operatives. Vajra offers the charac ters membership in the Gray Hands, a private secur ily force under her command . She doles out missions designed lo lax lhe characters' re sou rces and tesl their loyally lo Waterdeep. Characters who complete these missions won't gain enough renown to join Force Grey yet, but they will gaio something valuable: the Blackstaff's patronage. Vajra continues to take an interest in their adventuring careers, helping out when she can.

### Harp Er M Issions

Party Level 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Mission Brief "One of the drays working in the city is pulled by a talking mare named Maxeene. Locate her, find out if she's learned the identity of any Zhent operatives, and if so, determine their whereabouts ." "Uza Solizeph is an old woman who sells books out of a narrow three-story building on Sorn Street in the Trades Ward. She claims to have trapped a monster in her shop and fears for the welfare of her books and her cat. The City Watch isn't likely to lend a hand, given Uza's propensity for tall tales, but the Harp ers owe her a favor. You'll find her sob bing at Felzoun's Folly, a tavern on the corner of Sorn Street and Salabar Street. Make haste!" "One of our members, Mattrim Mereg, has allied himself with a gang of doppelgangers and believes the Harpers should recruit them. We need an unbiased opinion. Track down and speak with each of the doppelgangers, and gauge their trustworthiness ." "Lady Remallia Haventree is hosting a party at House Ulbrinter, her villa on Delzorin Street, located between Vhezoar Street and Brondar's Way in the North Ward. We have reason to suspect that drow spies have infiltrated the guest list. Attend the party and root out the disguised drow. Dress sharply."

### H A Rper S

The Harpers approach good-aligned cha racters who show promise as spies. One such character receives the following message, written on a pape r bird (see appendix A): "Renaer tells us you are a good bet. He bought you tickets to the opera tonight at the Lightsinger Theater in the Sea Ward. If you are interested, meet Mirt at intermission. Private Box C. Formal attire is required for admittance." Mission Requirements and Reward Characters can find Maxeene, a draft horse with an Intelligence score oflO, with a successful DC 13 Intelligence (Investigation) check. Maxeene speaks Common, and characters must try to con vince her that they're Harpers by making a DC 13 Charisma (Persua sion) check. If the check succeeds , the horse recalls giving a ride to a sun elf and his half-ore bodyguard two days ago; she picked them up at an intersection (she doesn 't recall which one) and dropped them off at the Yawning Portal. They talked about hiring spies to root out Xanathar Guild hideouts in the city. Maxeene's descriptions of the passe ngers match the appearances of Davi I Starsong and Yagra Stonefist. Reward: Each Harper character gains 1 renown. Uza (LG female human Mulan commoner) describes the threat as a "monstrous orb of many eyes" that chased her cat, Fillipa, into the shop. The monster is, in fact, a gazer (see appendix B). If the char acters met a gazer in chapter 1, they know what they're up against. Uza lends them the keys to the front and back doors of her shop. Characters find the interior in shambles and hear a cat meowing on the third Aoor. The sounds are coming from the gazer, which is hunting Fillipa. The cat has so far eluded the nasty little predator. Reward: Each Harper character gains 1 renown if the gazer is de feated. Uza also gives the party a used spell book containing four 1st-level and three 2nd-level wizard spells. The characters must speak with five doppelgangers, starting with their leader, "Bonnie," who works at the Yawning Portal. She needs a few days to round up the other doppelgangers , who agree to meet at the tavern in human guises. Characters must interview each doppelganger and succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom (Insight) check to ascertain its trustworthiness. Only "Bonnie" is trustworthy. Reward: Each Harper character gains 2 renown. Every contributing party member receives 50 gp. Remallia Haventree (see appendix B) knows of the mission, but it's not revealed to the characters that she's a Harper. There's one drow spy in attendance: Jarlaxle Baenre (see appendix B). He uses his hat of disguise to appear as a young actor from Luskan named Erystian Demarne. A successful DC 24 Wisdom (Insight) check is needed to out Jarlaxle. Impressed by the perceptive adventurers, he thanks Lady Haventree for an entertaining evening and dashes off, but not without fi rst tipping his hat to the character or characters who exposed him. Reward: Each Harper character gains 2 renown. Every party member who atte nded the party receives 200 gp. CllAPTER 2 I TROLLSKULL ALLE Y

## Page 39

Enclosed are tickets for the entire party to The Fall ofTiamat, an opera sung in Giant describing the evil dragon queen's defeat at the Well of Dragons.

### Mirt

If any of the characters join the Harpers, Mirt (see ap pendix B) becomes their main Harper contact through out the adventure. Lightsinger Theater is a high-end establishment lo cated in the Castle Ward. If the characters meet Mirt in bis private box during the opera's intermission, he describes the Harpers and offers membership to eligi ble characters. Characters who accept receive a silver pin of a harp within a crescent moon, along with their first mission (see the Harpers Missions table). Mirt also tells them that if they ever need to speak with him directly, they are welcome to visit his manor in the Sea Ward. If the characters do visit Mirt's manor, there 's a 90 percent chance that Mirt isn't home and no one an swers the door.

### Lords' Alliance Missions

Party Level 2nd Mission Brief "A gang war is causing unrest throughout the city. We have offered protection to members of the Dungsweepers' Guild, and you have been assigned to protect a group of them. Meet them at the Muleskull Tavern, on Ship Street in the Dock Ward, at six bells and guard them while they work. Do this every day for a tenday."

### Lords ' Allian Ce

Characters who place the security of the city and the realm ahead of their own interests are invited to join this faction. Potential recruits must be residents of Waterdeep. j ALES T ER S ILVERMANE The characters' primary contact is j alester Silvermane (see appendix B), a field agent who reports to Open Lord Laeral Silverhand. Ja lester spends much of his time in the Yawning Portal and other taverns that adventurers are known to frequent. Jalester offers membership in the Lords' AJ!iance to those who qualify. Members are expected to complete whatever missions are assigned to them in a timely, pro fessional manner. Refusing to accept or comp lete a mis sion can result in suspension or dismissal. An alliance member who is suspended receives no alliance missions until the suspension ends, while dismissal from the alliance means a loss of membership and the loss of all renown in the faction. Mission Requirements and Reward Each morning, the characters meet with a team of four dungsweep ers (commoners) and head to the Trades Ward, where the sweepers spend the day cleaning up waste in the streets. It's boring work. On the ninth day, around highsun, a carrion crawler emerges from a nearby alley, pursued by two City Watch guards . The characters can help slay the carrion crawler, which came up from the sewers. Reward: Each Lords' Alliance character gains 1 renown. 3rd "Harko Swornhold, an evil adventurer who was Whichever character leads the search must succeed on three DC exiled three years ago for attempting to bribe a 14 Intelligence (Investigation) checks before gaining thr~e failures, city magistrate, has returned to Waterdeep ille- with each check representing 8 hours of investigation. Other char gally. We think the Xanathar Guild is using him acters can assist, granting advantage on the checks. Harko (bandit 4th 5th to incite violence. He was last seen recruiting captain) has two kenku companions that fight by his side. Reward: kenku in the Dock Ward. Find him and quietly Each Lords' Alliance character gains 1 renown. put him to the sword." "The Zhents are courting a Red Wizard ofThay named Esloon Bezant, trying to add his gang of thugs to their ranks. All we know about him is that he fled his homeland a few years back and is too smart to get caught doing anything illegal. He and his gang of bullies prowl the Dock Ward. Scuttle the deal, and do it fast!" "The City Watch is overwhelmed by the recent surge in violence and needs our help. We have reports of an assassin prowling the rooftops, picking off targets with arrows and alarming citizens. My sources say he goes to ground somewhere near Trollskull Alley. Find him, alert the City Watch to his whereabouts, and aid in his arrest if you can. Don't kill him, since doing that could escalate the violence further." The characters can create a rift between the Zhentarim and Es loon's gang by sowing rumors of betrayal. They must spend 25 gp in bribes and succeed on a DC 16 Charisma (Deception or Persua sion) check. Conversely, they can confront Esloon Bezant (LE male Thayan human mage) and his gang of five thugs and either defeat them or bribe them with at least 500 gp. Reward: Each Lords' Alli ance character gains 2 renown. The characters can also deprive Es loon of his spellbook, which contains all the spells he has prepared. Whichever character leads the hunt must succeed on three DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation) checks before gaining three failures, with each check representing 8 hours of investigation. Other char acters can assist, granting advantage on the checks. If the search succeeds, characters corner the assassin, Ziraj the Hunte r (see ap pendix B), in the greenhouse of Corel Ion's Crown in Trollskull Alley (area T4). Ziraj surrenders to the City Watch without a fight, believ ing that his fellow Zhents will find a way to free him. Reward: Each Lords' Alliance character gains 2 renown. Every character who aids in Ziraj's capture receives SO gp.

### Chapter 2 I Trollskull Alley

## Page 40

### Order Of The Gauntlet

The Order of the Gauntlet looks for members who seek to fight evil in all its forms. Adventurers who worship Helm, Torm. or Tyr are especially sought after.

### Sav Ra Bela:Branta

If the party includes one or more likely recruits, Savra Belabranta (NG female Tethyrian human knight ) visits the characters' residence and invites them to the Halls of Justice, the temple ofTyr (localed west of the Market in the Castle Ward), where they can be sworn into the order. The swearing-in ceremony involves the recitation of an oath to find and destroy evil in all its forms. The oath is spoken while every candidate wears a silver gauntlet (a symbol of the order). After the ceremony, Savra gives new recruits their first mission. The Belabrantas are a Waterdav ian noble family that raises griffons for the Griffon Cavalry. Savra is trying to regain her honor by serving Tyr, thus atoning for the evil acts she committed as a member of an evil elemental

### Order Of The Gauntlet Missions

Party Level 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Mission Brief "We hear that the Zhents are paying gangs in the Field Ward to attack suspected Xanathar Guild members. Fights are breaking out in the ward daily. Stop a fight before it happens. We need to send a message to these thugs that further altercations won't be tolerated." "A notorious thief called the Black Viper, long thought dead, has apparently returned to Waterdeep. She has already robbed at least a dozen noble estates. No one knows her identity because she wears a mask, but it was reported in The Waterdeep Wazoo that she's a noble. Find out what else the broadsheet's publisher knows about her and report back to me." "Guards at the End shift Tavern, located on Endshift Street in the Field Ward, are being robbed nightly, and the innkeeper says he's seen giant rats prowling around the back al leys. Sounds dull, but it's a plea for help that we can't ignore." "I just received a report that spined devils are terrorizing citizens in Twelvedog Court, in the Field Ward. Come, let us slay them together and find their evil summoner!" cult called the Howling Hatred. Savra's sins are irrele vant to this adventure, but you can learn more about her past in Princes of the Apocalypse. Whenever she has a mission for the characters, she communicates the mis sive to them herself.

### Zhentarim

The Doom Raiders try to contact evil-aligned or morally ambiguous characters. A flying snake with a parch ment tied about its body visits one character in the dead of night. The message reads: 1 "Want to be part of something big? Speak to Davi! Star- I song at the Yawning Portal." If the characte rs seek out Davi!, Yagra Stonefist (see "Familiar Faces," page 20) greets them and leads interested parties to a table in the cente r of the Yawning Portal's taproom, where her boss waits with drink in band. Mission Requirements and Reward The characters must visit the Field Ward and, as a fight threatens to break out, make three successful DC 12 Charisma (Intimidation) checks before failing three checks, or else defeat four thugs (pref erably without killing them) to disperse the would-be brawlers. Reward: Each Order of the Gauntlet character gains 1 renown. The characters can meet with Gaxly Rudderbust (N male llluskan human commoner), the publisher of The Waterdeep Wazoo, and either succeed on a DC 12 Charisma (Intimidation or Persuasion) check or bribe him with at least 50 gp. If they do so, Gaxly shares his suspicions that the Black Viper is the secret, evil twin sister of Ammalia Cassalanter (see append ix B), and that she wears a mask to hide a disfigurement. Interviewing the Cassalanters at their villa (see chapter 6) or conducting a day-long investigation and succeed ing on a DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check reveals that no such person exists. Reward: Each Order of the Gauntlet character gains 1 renown for reporting what Gaxly said. The inn is being harassed by the Shard Shunners, a gang of halAing wererats, because the innkeeper's guards once threatened a gang member. To end the harassment, the characters must defeat three wererats or scare them off with a successful DC 17 Charisma (Intim idation) check. Reward: Each Order of the Gauntlet character gains 2 renown and receives a potion of healing. The characters must help Savra defeat five spined devils, which have locals pinned down in nearby buildings. Right afterward, Gy sheer Omfreys (LE female Tethyrian human cult fanatic) emerges from an alley and attacks Savra. Gysheer is an overzealous member of a devil·worshiping cult led by Victoro Cassalanter (see appendix B). Savra tries to subdue and question her, but only magical com pulsion can force her to implicate Victoro. Since devil worship isn't illegal in Waterdeep, Savra has no grounds to stir up trouble with the Cassalanters, and she advises characters not to do so, either. Reward: Each Order of the Gauntlet character gains 2 renown. Every character who took part receives a potion of greater healing. CHAPTER 2 I TROLLSKULL ALLl::Y

## Page 41

### Davil Starsong

Davil Starsong (see append ix B) is the c ha racte rs' prima ry conta ct in the Black Netwo rk, at least ini tia lly. Over drinks, he shares the following in form ation: • Davi! is a retired adventurer. He and his adventuring companions joined the Zhentarim a few years back. They h elp people in need. (More spec ifically, they pro vide loa ns. mercenaries, and othe r services .) • Another Black Network gang has recent ly infiltrated the city and tried to take over the Xanathar Gui ld. They failed, setting off a war in the streets. Davi I and

### Zhentarim Mission S

Party Level 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Mission Brief "Someone is killing elf and half-elf sailors in the Dock Ward-three dead so far, each one decap itated by a blade in the dead of night. Look into it, will you? Methinks the City Watch coul d use a little help." "The re's a shop in the Trades Ward called Weirdbottle's Concoctions . The gnome who runs it is a friend of ours named Skeemo. He's made some potions of mind reading for a client. Pick up the potions and deliver them to the God Catcher, one of the enormous statues in the Castle Ward. Give the potions to the lady in the purp le cloak, and keep the tip." "Waterdeep's richest halfl ing family, the Snobeedles, is offering 500 gold pieces for in· formation leading to the safe return of a miss· ing fami ly member named Dasher Snobeedle. Those dragons sure would look good in our coffers ! Investigate and see what you can learn, but don't get in any trouble. The City Watch already has it out for us." "Skeemo Weirdbottle has betrayed us! The lit· tie worm has been feeding information to our enemies. He must be elim inate d. Make it look like an accident."

### Chapter 2 I Trollskull Alley

his colleag ues want to end the vio lence and restore the peace. Davi ! offers membership in the faction to interested characters, then assigns them the ir first mission (se e the Zhentarim Missions table). Subsequ ent miss ion briefings a re written on scrolls and delivered by fly. ing snakes .

### T Ashlyn Yafeera

After the characters comp lete two missions for Davil, he is arrested by the City Watch and held in Castle Wa terdeep while he waits to be questioned by the Lords Mission Requirements and Reward Characters who spend three consecutive nights loitering around the docks spot Heldar, a drunk half-elf sailor (bandit), leaving the Muleskull Tavern (on Ship Street in the Dock Ward). Characters who follow Heldar can save him from Soluun Xibrindas , a renegade drow gunslinger (see appendix B). Soluun hides in the shadows, blade drawn, waiting for the half-elf to stumble by. Spotting him before he strikes requires a successful DC 18 Wisdom (Percept ion) check. Soluun flees if reduced to half his hit points or fewer. Reward: Each Zhentarim character gains 1 renown. If Heldar survives Soluun's attack, each character receives 50 gp. Skeemo Weirdbottle (see append ix B) has placed four potions of poison in a small silk-lined coffer. The potions look, smell , and taste like potions of mind reading. Awaiting delivery near the God Catcher is Esvele Rosznar, the Black Viper (see appendix B). She wears a hooded purple cloak and is seated in the back of a hire-coach. She exchanges the coffer for a black velvet pouch , then orde rs her driver to depart. The coach delivers Esvele to her estate in the Sea Ward. Reward: Each Zhentarim character gains 1 renown. Esvele's pouch contains 15 pp, which the characters can keep. Any character who spends at least three days asking pertinent questions and pursuing leads in the Southern Ward or the Dock Ward can, at the end of that time, make a DC 18 Charisma (Persua· sion or Intimidat ion) check. On a success , the character convinces some tight-lipped halflings to arrange a meeting with Dasher . The meeting is scheduled to occur at highsun in Waymoot the next day. Dasher shows up to hear what the characters have to say, but he has no intention of going home. He recently joined a gang ofhalfling wererats called the Sha rd Shunners (so named because they detest silver) and has since become a wererat himself (see chapter 1 for halfling wererat statistics). The Shard Shunners are his family now. Reward: Each Zhentar im character gains 2 renown . Skeemo Weirdbottle (see appendix B) manages to stay one step ahead of the characters . As they approach his shop, they see him ride off in a dray with five other passengers and a d river (all com moners ). If Skeemo realizes he's being followed , he casts fly and takes to the air. If the effect is dispelled or the characters maintain pursuit , he casts greater invisibility on himse lf and uses crowds to cover his escape. If the characters fail to nab him, he takes refuge in Kolat Towers (see chapter 8). Reward: Each Zhentarim character gains 2 renown ifSkeemo is eliminated without implicating the Black Networ k. In addition, characters who snatch Skeemo's satchel find that it holds his spellbook (containing all the spells he has pre· pared), a potion of mind reading, and 150 gp in a s ilk coin purse.

## Page 42

ofWaterdeep about the Black Network's operations in the city. The characters cont inue to receive missions, but they come from Tasbl yo Yafeera (see appendix B). Characters first become aware of this change when they receive their next mission briefing, since it's written in a different hand. If the characters want lo speak with Tashlyn direclly, Yagra can arrange a meeting in the City of the Dead or some other quiet place. By the time the characters see her, Tashlyn has learned the following information: • The rumored leader of the renegade Zhent faction is Urstul Floxin, a known Black Network assassin. • A warrant has been issued for Urstul's arrest, but his current whereabouts are unknown. Even magical scrying has failed to reveal his location. • The botched kidnapping of Renaer Neverember won't sit well with Urstul. He might try again. (Tashlyn doesn't actually believe this, but she knows that Renae r has ties to the Harpers and might share information of interest with the characte rs.) Weeks after his arrest, Davi! is released from custody once the Lords of Waterdeep are satisfied that neither he nor his associates are responsible for the re cent violence.

### Open For Business?

If the characters intend to fix up and reopen the tavern in Trollskull Alley, they can expect to deal with various guilds without whose support the business is likely to fail. Repairs to the walls and the roof require the ap proval and oversight of the Carpenters', Roofers', and Plaisterers' Guild. The Cellarers' and Plumbe rs' Guild is best equipped to handle the refurbishing of the base ment and plumbing. Clean bedsheets are provided by ihe Launderers' Guild. The streets around the establish ment are kept up by the Dungsweepers' Guild and the Loyal Order of Street Laborers. Meat must come from the Guild of Butchers; ale and wine from the Vintners', Distillers', and Brewers' Guild: and bread and pastries from the Bakers' Guild. The list goes on. The "Tavern Keeping Expenses" sidebar lists the costs that the characters must pay to get their place ready for business, as well as the recurring obligations they must meet while the tavern is open for business.

### Sampl E Gui Ld R Epre Sentati Ves

Once it becomes known around the city that the tavern in Trollskull Alley is planning to reopen its doors to the public, the adventure rs receive visits from guild repre sentatives interested in the tavern's welfare. This sec tion describes a handful of these representatives. BROXLEY f AIRKETTLE Fellowship of Innkeepers Broxley (LG male strongheart haltling commoner ) is a laid-back, law-abiding halfiing with mutton chops and bushy eyebrows. Inns and taverns are few and far between in the North Ward, so he makes frequent visits to the characters' place to see how it's doing and to offer his well-wishes. If none of the characters are members of the guild, he strongly urges them co join "to avoid further harassment." The cost of membe r ship in the Fellowship of Innkeepers is included in the regular expenses outlined in the "Tavern Keeping Ex penses~ sidebar. Broxley has long believed the tavern to be haunted and is glad to see living sou ls in it once more. While lament ing the burdens of being a father of nine. he is quick to point out that the characters ' continued compliance with guild rules and regulations makes his rather difficult life "just a bitty bit eas ier."

### Hammond Kraddoc

Vintners', Distillers: and Brewers· Guild Hammond (N male Illuskan human common er) does n't like adventurers, but he likes their coin. This effete, well-dressed man is always seen in the company of a young scribe, Jinny (NG female tiefting commo ner), who wears spectacles and silently records notes and conver sations in a small book as Hammond spea ks. Hammond likes to stop by in the middle of the month to inform the characters of new spirits that the guild bas to offer, and to give them a list of which ones to push hard. To test the extent of their willingness to cooperate, he chastises them for their current selection of bever ages, even if he previously sold them those goods. jUSTYN RASSK Guild of Butche rs Dead-eyed, slack-jawedjustyn (NE male llluskan hu man thug) grew up in the toughest neighborhood in the Field Ward and has the scars to prove it. The guild doesn't pay him enough for him to afford a residence in the North Ward, and going to that part of the city fills his heart with resentment. He darkens the characters' doorstep once a month to deliver a cartload of chopped meat for the tavern's larder. Although delivery fees are covered by the guild's monthly dues,Justyn always de mands some extr a coin for his service. If the characte rs don't give him a gratuity of at least 3 gp, he says, '·Maybe next time the meat will be someone you know." He lets the threat hang in the air, then departs.

### Tave Rn Ke Eping Ex Pen Ses

This sidebar summarizes the one-time payments and continuing expenses associated with running the tavern in Trollskull Alley, as well as providing rules for determining how much coin the business makes or loses. One-Time Expenses • 1,000 gp to renovate the tavern over 12 days • 250 gp for guild licenses and contracts (paid up front) Regular Expenses • 50 gp per tenday for maintenance and wages of hirelings • 10 gp per tenday for all other guild expenses Profit or Loss At the end of every tenday, roll a dlOO + 10 and consult the Running a Business table in chapter 6 of the Dungeon Master's Guide to determine whether the tavern lost money or earned profit. If the characters spent coin on promoting their business during that tenday, add l to the roll for each l gp they spent. If the characters have unpaid expenses, subtract l from the roll for each l gp they owe. C H APTE R 2 I TROLLSKULl. ALLEY

## Page 43

### Ulkoria Stonemarrow

Watchful Order of Magists and Protectors Ulkoria (NG female shield dwarf archmage) has de fended Waterdeep with her magic more times than she can recall. She's known as ''the Gargoyle" because her face is frozen in a scowl that frightens adults and children alike. No one knows where she lives. but it's believed to be unde rground, poss ibly a cellar or dungeon unde r one of the city's oldest estates. She uses teleport spells to enter and leave her home. and she's never seen without her shield guardi an close by. A little known fact is that Ulkoria once owned the tavern in Trollskull Alley. She sold it to a family of shield dwarves, who fell on hard times and sold it to a woma n who made it into an orphanage. "Turned out to be a hag who was cooking and eating the children," Ulkoria re calls. The estate passed through several more hands in the years that followed. Ulkoria hopes the new owners make someth ing good of it. Anytime she passes through the North Ward, Ulkoria stops by the tavern for a drink and to check out the place while her shield guardian waits outside. If she doesn't like what the characters have done with the establish ment, she keeps her criticisms to herself. The characters can hire her to cast glyphs of warding on the place, for which she cha rges 300 gp apiece.

### B Us I Ness Rival: Emmek F Rewn

Emmek Frewn, a saJty northerner (NE male Illuskan common er), recent ly tried to buy the tavern in Trollskull Alley but was outbid by Volothamp Geddarm. Stung by the loss, he bought a smaller, less impressive building in the same alley and turned it into a pub, which he calls Frewn's Brews. If you decide to introduce Emmek as a business rival, choose an unmarked building on map 2.1 to serve as the pub. Emmek's family migrated to Waterdeep after its hold ings in Neverwinter were destroyed by the eruption of Mount Hotenow in 1451 DR. The family struggled to make ends meet by tanning leather in the Trades Ward. After Emmek's parents died, his sisters took over the bus iness and bought him out. He never liked the work anyway, and he particularly hated dealing with the League of Skinners and Tanners. Emmek is on shaky financial footing because he bas sunk most of his wealth into this latest endeavor. He's also in troub le with two of the guilds. First, he tried to save coin by fixing the roof himself. in defiance of the Carpenters', Roofers'. and Plaisterers · Guild. Then he of fended a member of the Cellarers' and Plumbers' Guild by compa ring the dwarf's beard to barnacles on a ship.

### Goals

Emmek wants his pub to be the most successful tavern in the North Ward, and he wants the characters' busi ness to fail spectacularly.

### Assets

Emmek is sti ngy when it comes to certain kinds of ex penses and foolish with his coin in other ways. He tends to spend a lot on big, showy items and cut corners on the little amenities. Because he doesn't have much coin to

### C.. Hapter ?. 11 Ro Lls Ku Ll Alley

throw around right now, his plan to ruin the characters' establishment begins with borrowing some money.

### Plans

Emmek secures a 150 gp loan from lstrid Hom (see ap pendix B). He spends 50 gp for the services of the Shard Shunners, a gang of halfling wererats with which he has had nefarious dealings in the past. He pays the halflings to hinder the characters' efforts while he works fever ishly to manage his own business. Four gang members have been assigned to work with Emmek: two males named Kelso Fiddlewick and Dasher Snobeedle. and two females named Danika Fid dlewick (Kelso's younger sister) and Brynn Hilltopple. These halnings are wererats, with these changes: Each wererat is Small and has 27 (6d6 + 6) hit points. • It has these racial traits: It can move through the space of a Medium or larger creature. lt has advantage on saving throws against being frightened. It speaks Common and Halfling, and it knows thieves' cant. Emmek's strategy for ruining the compet ition and the consequences for putting it into action are summarized in the table below.

### Em Mek'S Plans

Element Event Event Action Event Action Action Description The wererats scope out the characters' tavern in halfling forms and might try to get jobs there. The wererats plant morsels of food inside the characters' place and bore tiny holes in the out· side walls to attract rats, creating an infestation. Emmek spreads rumors that the characters' tav ern is rat-infested, which is why he didn't buy it. Apply a -10 penalty on the next three rolls char· acters make on the Running a Business table (see "Tavern Keeping Expenses," page 41). The Shard Shunners claim they've done enough for their coin and demand more. Emmek pays the were rats another SO gp to creep around the characters' tavern at night in hybrid and rat form, carve rat faces into the doors of neighbors, and otherwise draw atten tion to themselves. Emmek convinces several local residents to sign a letter he has drafted, then dispatches it to the City Watch. The letter accuses the characters of running a front for a guild of wererat thieves and urges the Watch to close their establishment.

### Level A Dvancement

Jn this section of the adventure, the characters should advance to 3rd level by engaging in faction missions, dealing with Emmek Frewn, or partaking in self-directed activities. This period of time represents an opportunity for the characte rs to make friends and gain a reputation (for good or ill) in Trollskull Alley-and in Waterdeep itself-before the events of chapter 3 embroil them in a greater plot.
