# Chapter 7: Maestro's Fall

_Source pages: 132-147_

## Page 132

### Chapter 7: Maestro'S Fall

### Arlaxle, The Leader Op Brecan D'Aerthe,

sees membership in the Lords' Alliance as his path to power beyond Luskan. As the secret lord of a city with an unsavory repu tation, he has had a hard time getting a seat at the table with other cities of the North when it comes to trade and defense of the region. Thus, he plans to use the stolen gold to bargain with Laeral Silverhand for inclusion in the alliance, and to oust Neverwinter and its lord DaguJt Neverember - Jarlaxle's fiercest political opponent - from the group. FACING jARLAXLE As the characters investigate the Sea Maidens Faire, they could run into Jarlaxle, especially if they take a kick-in-the-door approach and storm the vessels of the traveling carnival. When Jarlaxle learns that the char acters are aboard one of his ships, he arranges to meet with them in the guise of Zardoz Zord. If they refuse, Jarlaxle orders his crew to cast the characters over board - or takes care of the job himself if he must. If he thinks the adventurers can be trusted, jarlaxle proposes that they join his search for the Vault of Drag ons. He intends to return the gold to Laeral Silverhand, less 5,000 gp for the characters in exchange for their help. He offers another 5,000 gp for their help in recov ering the dragonstaff of Ahghairon. If the characters accept,jarlaxle upholds his end of the agreement. Once the gold is secure, he gives the characters their cut. If the characters don't agree to jarlaxle's terms, or if they assault him, he tries to knock them unconscious and leave them without clothes or equipment in a gutter in the Dock Ward. He stores their equipment in areajl6 aboard the Eyecatcher, with the exception of any magic items. Those be stashes in area U4 aboard the Scarlet Marpenoth, his secret submarine. In the unlikely event tbatjarlaxle is killed, Bregan D'aerthe raises him from the dead within a tenday. Once he's back in action, he tries to recover any gear that was stolen from him. DISRUPT I NG j A RLAXLE'S OPERATIO N Characters can hinder Jarlaxle in the ways described in the following two subsections.

### Destroythe Figureheads

The figureheads onjarlaxle's ships (areaJ8) create illu sions around drow crew members, making them appear human. If a figurehead is destroyed, the drow on that ship remain belowdecks to ensure that they don't draw unwanted attention.

### Sink Or Steal A Vessel

If the characters sink or steal one of his sailing ships or the Scarlet Marpenoth,Jarlaxle tasks his crew mem bers with finding out what went wrong. In the case of a sunken ship, such wanton destruction could also involve the City Watch, especially if the act results in people drowning.

### Chapter 7 I Maestro'S Fall

## Page 133

### S Ea M A Ide Ns Fai Re

jarlaxle Baenre's seafaring carnival travels up and down the Sword Coast in three ships. The Eyecatcher, jarlaxle's flagship, is ostentatious. Mounted underneath it is the Scarlet Marpenoth, a submarine of Lantanese design. The second ship, the Hear/breaker, is primarily used to transport perform ers, strang e crea tures, and wagons. The third ship, the Hellraiser, transports musi cians and decorative floats. The Heartbreaker and the Hellraiser are presently docked. while the Eyecatcher is anchored in the harbor. All three ships are crewed by drow who are magically disguised to appear human. Despite their disguises, the drow still have the SunHght Sensitivity trait.

### Approaching The Ships

The Heartbreak er and the Hellraiser are docked across from each other at the same pier in the Dock Ward. The characters need only walk up a ramp from the pier to areajl on either ship. The pier is so busy that no one takes notice of the characters until they are on a vessel. jarlaxl e's flagship is anchored in Deepwater Harbor, a mile away from his other ships. To reach the Eyecatcher, the characters must travel there by using anothe r vessel, by swimming, or by flying. If the charac ters approach in a vessel known to the crew. such as a rowboat from another of jarlaxle 's ships, the characters arouse no suspicion until they are seen on deck. The crew of the Eyecatcher crew sends word to jarlaxl e immediately if the characters approach in an unknown vessel. If the characte rs approach the Eyecatcher in an un derwater vehicle, such as Grinda Garloth's apparatus of Kwa/ish (see chapter 4), the character piloting must s ucceed on a DC 12 Dexterity (Stealth) check to keep the vehicle from being spotted by the crew of the Scarlet Marpenoth. If the characters approach by swimming, each of them must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Stealth) check to avoid being spotted by the crew of the Eyecatcher.

### Crews

The characters can learn valuable information by inter rogating crew members and carnival performers.

### Sh I P Captains

Although Zardoz Zord Uarlaxle Baenre) commands the Heel, each ship has its own captain: a Bregan D'aertbe drow mage disguised as a slender, well-dressed human. These captains know of jarlaxle's plans. They communi cate with each other and with jarlaxle by way of sending spe lls, which they prepare instead of fly. Velgos Ephezzrin captains the Hellraiser in the guise of a human named Fergus Crabwater. He enjoys wine a little too much, and characters have advantage on Cha risma checks made to interact with him during a meal. Tylan Ilueph captains the Heartbreaker as a human named Klarr Besham. He's a humorless taskmaster whose tarantula familiar is always on his shoulder. Llorath Pham captains the Eyecalcher as a human named Tarwind Arryhook. He loves games of chance and can't resist a good wager. CHAPTl!R 7 I MAESTRO 'S FALL A successful DC 15 Charisma (Deception or Persua sion) check and the mention of Zardoz Zord's name is enough lO gain an audience with a ship captain. If the characters capture one of the captains and succeed on a DC 15 Charisma (Intimidation) check, they learn the following information by asking the right questions: • "The Sea Maidens Faire and all its ships are under the command of Captain Zardoz Zord of Luskan." (A ship capta in won't divulge Zord's true identity unless magically compe lled to do so.) • "Zord has a cabin aboard the Eyecatcher and spends a lot of Lime there with Margo Verida and Khafeyta Mur zan, two of the Faire 's star performers." • "A year ago, the Sea Maidens Faire visited the island nation of Lantan, where Zord acquired a submarine called the Scarlet Marpenoth. The submarine is mounted underneath the Eyecatcher." "Zord has operatives searching for an artifact called the Stone ofGolorr, which leads to a place called the Vault of Dragons." (For security, the captains aren't kept informed as to the mission's progress.) • "Zord has drow spies in Waterdeep - Fel'rekt Lafeen, Krebbyg Masq'il'yr. and Soluun Xibrindas. All carry Lantanese firearms." • "Our disguises are powered by a magical figurehead fixed to the fore of each ship."

### Sailors

The Eyecatcher, the Heartbreaker, and the Hellraiser are crewed by twenty sailors each: three drow elite warriors (mates) and seventeen drow , all magically dis guised as slender humans while aboard their vessel. All are loyal members of Bregan D'aerthe, and all know that Zardoz Zord isjarlaxle Baenre in disguise. They know nothing about the Scarlet Marpenoth or jarlaxle's plans. The crew has orders not to fraternize with strangers or guests. Characters who question crew members can learn the following: • "Zardoz Zord is master of the Sea Maidens Faire. If you want to meet him, talk to a ship captain." (A sailor won't divulge Zord's true identity unless magically compe lled to do so.) • "The Sea Maidens Faire is based out ofLuskan."

### Carnies

Most of the carnival performers and workers are human commoners trained to perform a handful of tasks or stunts. (Pe rformers have proficiency in the Performance skill.) They're kept in the dark about most things, but they're not oblivious. With a successful DC 10 Charisma check, a cha racter can cajole or trick a carny into reveal ing one of the following pieces of information: • "Zardoz Zord uses magic to get from the Eyecatcher to the other boats. I've never seen him in a rowboat." • ·'The sailors communicate with each other using odd hand signals." (Members of Bregan D'aerthe use Drow Sign Language.) • "All the sailors have an aversion to sunlight:' • ''Have you noticed the sailors have the slightest hint of an Elvish accent?" • "All the crew members are men. Very odd."

## Page 134

### D Iscove Ri Ng The Drow

Any chara cter who spends l hour observing a ship's crew can make a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check. With a successfu l check, the character notices that most crew memb ers speak Common with an Elvish accent and exchange hand signals when they think no one is looking. A drow cha racter recognizes the hand signals as Drow Sign Language. The changes wrought by the magic of the ships' figure heads (see areaj8) fail to hold up to physical inspe ction, meaning that chara cters who interact with crew mem bers have a chan ce to notice the illusion. For example, a character who grabs one of the sailors by the ear would quickly realize by touch that the ea r is pointed. not round ed as it appears. Additionally, any drow character who boards one of these sh ips instantly takes on the illusory form of a human of the same gender, height, and weight, because of the magic of the sh ip's figurehead.

### Sh I P Featu Res

Each shi p has the stat istics of a sailing ship (see the Airborne and Waterborne Vehicles table in chapter 5 of the Dungeon Master's Guide) as well as the features de scribed in the following s ubsections.

### Alarms

If intrud ers are detected or a fight breaks out on one of the ships, the ent ire crew (one drow mage captain, three drow elite warrior s, and seve nteen drow ) mobilizes to comba t the threat. The drow prefer to take capt ives or render enemies unconscious rather than kill them. Captives are thrown in the brig (area]15) until ]arlaxl e decides what to do with them, and their gear is stowed in the armory (area]l6). CElLINGS Cabins, holds, and passag eways have 8-foot-high ceil ings with 6-foot-high doorways connecting them .

### Doors

Unless otherwise noted, door s are made of wood. A door's lock ca n be picked by a character who makes a successful DC 15 Dexterity chec k using thieves' tools, or a door can be forced open by a charac ter who makes a successful DC 15 Strength (Athlet ics) check. A ship's capta in has keys to all locked doors aboard his vessel.

### Elevator Platforms

Each s hip is equipped with an elevator platform that can be lowered and raised with a lever to make loading and unloading cargo eas ier. When not in use, this platform stays in the lowest cargo hold of eac h ship. See the de scriptions of the cargo holds for more information.

### Lighting

Areas belowdecks are brightly lit by hanging lanterns.

### Rigging

Rigging can be climbed without an ab ility check .

### Chapter 7 I Maestro'S Fall

## Page 135

### Areas Of The Shi P S

The Eyecatcher, the Heartbreaker, and the Hellraiser have the same general configuration and occupants, cor responding to map 7.L Exceptions are noted in an area's description and on the map. Jl. MAIN DECK Three sailors (drow) and a mate (drow elite wa rrior ) are on deck at all times. If the characters board the sh ip and ask to speak with the captain, the mate asks their business before even thinking about disturbing hjm. jolly Boats. Four rowboats are stacked on top of each other on this deck . Ropes and pulleys are used to hoist these boats in and out of the water.

### J2 . Storage

The smell of tar permeates this cluttered cabin, which contains the following features: • Barrels of tar are secured with nets to the starboard wall below mounted tools. • Against the port wall, tight rolls of white canvas are stacked on top of each other and secured with rope .

### J3 . Mates' Cabin

This cabin has the following features: • Twin hammocks hang perpendicular to one another. Two off-duty mates {drow elite warrio rs) relax in the hammocks . Three walnut chests sit under the hammocks. The chests are unlocked. Treasur e. Each chest holds two sets of common clothes, a waterskin filled with wine, and a pouch con taining 3d6 gp and 4d10 sp.

### J4. Crew Cabins

Each of these cabins holds four han1mocks. One off-duty sailor (drow) rests in each cabin.

### J5. Galley

Heat and savory scents burst from this cramped cabin, which contains the following features: A busy cook (common er) works a frying pan with one hand and stirs a pot with the other over a small stove. Dirty dishes are stacked in a washbasin. • A table holds foods in various states of preparation. The cook is too busy to speak with characters, and is quick to holler in alarm if attacked, drawing the atten tion of the crew. ]6. PANTRY Secured to the walls are racks of cooking ingredients, including jars of spices, sacks of A our, and casks of lard.

### J7. D Ining Cabin

The crew dines here throughout the day. At any given time , the cabin contains the following: • Six sailors (drow) are enjoying a meal. • Aboard the Heartbreaker or the Hellraiser, the sailors are joined by ld4 carnies (commoners ).

### Chapter. 7 I Maestro'S Fall

• Furnishings include a table, ten stoo ls, and two oak cabinets containing dishes, tankards, and utensils. ]8. FORECASTLE The forecastle is withi n sight of the sai lors on the main deck (areajl), the aft castle lower deck (areaj9), and the aft cast le upper deck (areajll). Figureh ead. A gilded wooden figurehead of a female elf with flowing hair sticks out from the sh ip's prow, reaching forth with both hands. Since Lhe figurehead is unpainted, there's no way to tell that it depicts a drow, but a character who inspects the figurehead closely and succeeds on a DC 13 Wisdom (Perception) check no tices a tiny embossed spide r on its forehead. A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura of illusion magic around the figurehead - the effect that makes every drow aboard the ship appear as a human . A drow's gender, height, and weight are unchange d; the illusion affects only appearance, not voice or manner isms. Casting dispel magic on a disguised drow causes the illusion around it to wink out only for a moment . An antimagic field suppresses the figurehead's magic within the field's area. Destroying the figurehead ends the ef fect throughout the ship. A figurehead has AC 15, 50 hit points, and immunity to poison and psychic damage.

### J9. Aft Castle Lower Deck

This deck has the following features: • Two sailors (drow) are here at all times. Stairs to port and starboard climb to the aft castle up per deck (areajll) and the captain's wheel. Anchor . The ship's anchor is accessed from this deck. It can be raised or lowered by one creature in 10 rounds (1 minute), by two creatures in 5 rounds, by three crea tures in 3 rounds, or by four creatures in 1 round. JlO. CAPTAIN'S CABIN Regardless of which ship the characters are on, this op ulent cabin contains the following features: • Stylish purple drapes cover the large windows that look out over the harbor. To one side of a central pillar rests a comfortable bed, its oak headboard carved to resemble a kraken. An oak dining table surrounded by six high-backed chairs rests on the opposite side of the centra l pillar . • Other furnishings include a glass-doored cabinet con taining shelves of books, a wooden trunk sealed with a padlock, and a small writing desk. Capta in. Each ship's captain {drow mage) can usually be found here, with a nimblewri gbt (see appendix B) acting as an attendant and bodyguard. A captain is happy to meet with characters who ask to speak with him, mostly to gauge whether they pose a threat. If the characters are polite, the captain invites them to join him for a meal. If the characters grow tire some or threatening, he commands them to leave the ship at once, sounding an alarm if they refuse. Fastened to each captain's belt is a ring holding a number of keys. One key unlocks the trunk in this cabin; other keys unlock any locked doors on the captain's ship.

## Page 136

lt:=m~ J14 ~==f_J l>=a:mti G> rr=--=<j Orlop Deck OJ 0 J17 0 ~ M11P 7 ,. SHIPS OF THE SEii MlllOEN~ flllRE J1 © A~ -:=- .a. ~ ..:.

### J4 J4

### J4 J4

0

### Js J6

Main Deck rn 0 JS l l,,. , I .. J~ J9 ~ Fore and Aft Decks ..!iL J11 Aft Castle l square = 5 feet

### Chapter 7 Maestro'S Fau

## Page 137

Book Cabinet. Each captain keeps a modest collection of mundan e books. Each hides his spellbook in a secret space under the bottom shelf, which can be found with a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Perception) check. The spellbook contains the following spells: cone of cold, con trol water, counterspe/J, detect magic, fireball, fly, greater invisibility, ice storm, mage armor, magic missile, misty step, Rary's telepathic bond, sending, shield, suggestion, thunderwave, water breathing, and web. Locked Trunk. A successful DC 20 Dexterity check by a cha racter using thieves' tools opens the padlock, or it can be broken off with a successful DC 20 Strengt h (Athletics) check. The trunk contains folded clothes, 250 gp in a sack, ld6 pearls (worth 100 gp each) in a silk pouch, a potion of water breathing, and a bottle of excel lent wine (worth 25 gp), bearing a label in the s hape of an eye patch and the name "One-Eyedjax" in Common. Jll. AFT CASTLE UPPER DECK This highest deck of the ship is within sight of the fore cast le (areaJ8), the main deck (areaJl), and the aft cas tle lower deck (area ]9). It has the following features: The sh ip's wheel stands atop the deck. • Two sailo rs (drow) are stationed here at all times. Wheel. If the ship is sailing with a full crew, a charac ter who has proficiency with water vehicles can stand at the wheel and steer the vessel.

### J12. Upper Cargo Hold

This hold contains the following features: • Large grilled doors in the ceiling open to allow goods to be moved to and from this hold using the cargo eleva tor. A 15-foot-by-10-foot section of floor opens to reveal the lower cargo hold (areaJ17 aboa rd the Eyecatcher or the Hell raiser; area ]19 aboard the Heartbreaker). Crates and barrels stacked to the ceiling are tied down to ensure that they don't move. These containers bold food and water for the crew and the carnies. Cargo Elevator. To activate an elevator platform, a creature must stand on the platform and use an action to pull a lever up or down. The platform can't be raised higher than the main deck (areaJl) or lowered deeper than a sh ip's lowest cargo hold. The trapdoor in the Boor opens when the ca rgo eleva tor is raised. If the platform is raised to areaJl, the trap door rema ins open until the elevator platform r eturns to this area or areajl 7 Q19 on the Heartbreaker).

### J13. Head

The reek of urine fills the cramped head. Privies - each little more than a bench seat with a hole open to the wa ter below-are this room's only features. Jl4. CARNIES' CABINS Eight narrow cabins are fitted with hammocks, each of which holds a resting carnival performer or worker (commoner ). Carn ies call for help when they are con fronted by intruders and fight only in self-defense.

### Chapter 7 I Maestro'S Fall

jl5. BRIG A door made of crisscrossing iron bars and fitted with a sturdy lock seals off this cabin, whose only feature is a chamber pot. The captain carries the key to the door. The lock can be picked by a character who makes a suc cessful DC 17 Dexterity check using thieves' tools (made with disadvantage from inside the cell). A successful DC 23 Strength (Athletics) check forces the door open. The door has AC 19, a damage threshold of 10, 27 hit points, and immunily to poison and psychic damage. jailed Sailor. There's a 25 percent chance that a sailor (drow) is being held in the brig after punching a crewmate during an argument.

### J16. Armory

The drow store their weapons and armor here while the ship is at sea. If the cha racters are captured and stripped of their equ ipment, their nonmagical belongings are stowed here. The cabin has the following features: • Empty weapon racks and armor hooks line the walls. • Stairs lead down into the ship's belly. Safe (Eyecatcher Only). The armory aboard the Eye catcher also features a 750-pound cast iron safe with a combination lock.jarlaxle and his lieutenants (Fel'rekt Lafeen, Krebbyg Masq'il'yr, aod Soluun Xibrindas) know the comb ination: 1- 20-59. A characte r can pick the lock with a successful DC 25 Dexterity (Investigat ion) check using thieves' tools. Each attempt takes 1 minute. A knock spell or similar magic also opens the safe, which contains three pistols, twelve leather packets of smoke powder, three leather pouches containing twenty bullets each, and 250 gp in a sack . Stairs. The stairs lead to areaj17 on the Eyecatcher or the Hellraiser, or to areaJ20 on the Heartbreaker.

### J17. Lower Cargo Hold

Eyecatcher and Hel!raiser only The fantastical floats of the Sea Maidens Faire are bro ken down and kept in the lower cargo hold of the Rel/ raiser, while the Eyecatcher holds pieces of broken and experimental floats. (See areaj19 for a description of the Heartbreaker's lower cargo hold.) Cargo Elevator. If the cargo elevator platform is low ered to this area while creatures are in the 15-foot-by- 10-foot space where the platform lands, each of those creatures must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or take 11 (2dl0) bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone and restrained until the platform is raised. A creatu re that succeeds on its saving throw moves to a space of its choice next to the elevator plat form without provoking opportunity attacks . Hellraiser's Hold. The hold of the Hellraiser is mostly cleared out on days when parades are schedu led, except for empty storage trunks. On other days, it contains the following paraphernalia: • Various trunks filled with musician, dance r. acrobat, and clown costumes Casks holding confetti, glitter, and body paint Bundles of wooden stilts (4 and 8 feet high) Papier-mache beholders mounted atop 10-foot poles

## Page 138

• A float topped by a life-size mechanical unicorn ridden by a mechanical drow rang e r waving two scimitars (when a lever under the float is pulled, the unicorn farts a IS-foot cone of confetti, which it can do lwice before need ing to be refilled) • A float topped with two mechan ical goblins that re peate dly punch each othe r when wound up A float bea ring a mechan ica l armored knight battling a mechanical pit fiend (when wound up, the knighl cleaves with its swor d while the devil flaps its win gs) Deflated black, blue. green, red, and white dragon balloon s (they float magica lly when filled with air, and their size is Huge while inflaled) An enormous larrasque pupp et for five pupp etee rs • Wagon covers decorated with tasse ls and painted with colorful patterns and creatures • Hors e and ox harnesses, all brightly decorated Eyecatcher 's Hold. The aft section of the hold of the Eyecatcher is gua rded by four gia nt spiders painted in bright colors. These arachnids have been trained by jarlaxl e since they were hatchlin gs, and they can pass themse lves off as inanimate float decora tions by remain ing perfectly still until they attack. They aren' t hostile toward drow, whose lrue nature they sense despite the ship's illusion magic. Charact ers who have a pass ive Wisdom (Perception) score of 17 or higher realize thal the spiders arc a lhreat before the crealures attack. All sorts of damaged and unfinis hed attractions are sto red here. including the following: • A number of broken clockwork monsters • Half-completed or broken wagon covers and pupp ets • A deflated balloon of an oversized Aumph that has a sma ll gash in it (a mending ca ntrip ca n repair the damag e) • Ao undecorated float, topped with a n unpainted me chanical gold dragon made of canvas st retche d over a wooden frame Rigged with a glass can ister of flammable gas, the me chan ica l gold dragon is designed to breathe fire when a lever is pulled. Pulling the leve r cracks lhe canister a nd sets the dra gon on fire. If the fire brea ks out here and isn't extinguished promptly, it spreads lo other parts of the hold after 1 min ute. Crew members in othe r parts of the ship detect smoke 5 minutes later, by which time the hold is a raging inferno . Crew membe rs will focus on saving the submarine (if it's still attached) before aban doning ship. jl8. CRAFT SUPPLIES Eyecatcher and Hellraiser only Each of these cabins contains materia ls used to deco rate floats: • Glitter, feathers, fabric, paper, scisso rs, sewing nee dles , spools of colored thread, and flasks of glue a re strewn over small tables. • Schematics for parade floats are tacked lo the walls alongside various tools. jl9. L OWE R CA RGO H OLD Heartbreaker only Beastly odors fill the hold of the Hcartbreaker, becom ing stronger as the charact ers get closer to the creature pens (areaj20). The hold is mostly empty on parad e days. On other days, it contains disassembled wagons (axles, wheels, and cages) that are used to pull exotic creat ures through crowded streets. Tools needed to assemble and repair the wagons hang from hooks on the walls. Cargo Elevator . If the ca rgo elevalor platform is low ered to this area while creatures a re in the 15-foot-by- 10-foot space where the platform la nds, each of lhos e creatures must succee d on a DC J 0 Dexterity saving throw or take I J (2dl0) bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone and restrained until the platform is raised. A creat ure that succeeds on its sav ing throw moves to a space of its choice next to the elevator plat form without provoking opportunity attacks. ]20. CREATURE P EN S Heartbreaker only This section of the hold reeks of ani mal musk and waste. When they're not being paraded through city streets in cage-wagons , the monst rous attractions of the Sea Maidens Faire growl, chorlle, stamp, snort, and roar in closed s talls. Two hand lers (commo ners with proficiency in Animal Handling) walk from s tall to stal l. carryi ng buckets of food and s peaki ng softly to the crea tures. Each pen is effectively a cell equipped with a s liding door that ca n be double-latched from the outside. A wagon assembled in areaj19 ca n be backed up to any pen. With the pen door open, a s uccess ful DC 15 Wisdom (Anima l Hand ling) chec k then coa xes a caged creature into the back of a wagon. This chec k is made with advantage if food is given to the creat ure. lf this check fails by 5 or more, the creature escapes, pan ics, and begins attacking indiscriminately as it tries to win its freedom . Any such ruckus alerts the animal handl ers or other crew mem bers if they are nea rby. The following creatu res are kept in the twelve pens: Two apes One rhin oceros One tiger One allosa uru s Two panth ers Oneo wlbear Four giant fire beetle s One bippogriff One axe beak Two deat h dogs One gian t vulture One polar bear The death dogs and the giant vulture a re evil, and the giant vullure can understand Common (though it ca n't speak) . They seize any chance to escape and revel in the suffering of other crea tures. j21. HANDLER S' CABIN Heartbreaker only This cabin contains hamm ocks for the two handler s who work in area j20. Lf the creatures have been taken on parade, the handlers are asleep in their hammocks. CHAPTfR 7 I MAESTRO'S fA ll

## Page 141

### J22. Beast Supplies

Heartbreaker only Supplies and food for the creatures in areaj20 are stored here: • Haunches of meat hanging from the ceiling give this cab in a sickly sweet scent. • Shovels, ropes, chains, buckets, bales of hay, and sev eral large crates are pushed against the walls. The crates hold a variety of lichens, mosses, and fungi that are fed to the herbivorous creatu res. A successful DC 20 Intelligence (Nature) check identifies the vege tation as native to the Underdark. and the haunches of animal meat as deep rothe - an ox-like creature raised for its meat by drow in the Underdark.

### J23. Gunslingers' Hold

Hear/breaker and Hellraiser only No one is allowed down here without the capta in's per mission, and the guards have orders to kill trespassers on sight. This area contains the following features: • 1\vo drow gunslin gers (see appendix 8) stand guard outside area ]27. The hold is filled with barrels containing ale and fresh water. The barrels are held down by cargo nets hooked to the Door. Drow Gunslin gers. The drow take cover behind the walls that divide this area as they shoot. They fight to the death to keep intrud ers from reaching areaj27. j24. CLEAN1NG SUPPLIES These closets hold mops, brushes, buckets, and soap used for scrubbing the decks. j25. GUNSLINGERS' CABINS Heartbreaker and Hellraiser only These two cabins are the quarters of the drow gunsli ng ers in areaj23. Each contains the following features: • A hammock hangs on the wall opposite the door. • A wooden mannequin and a walnut chest rest against the wall by the door. The mannequins double as armor racks, though no armor cur rently adorns them. Treasure. Each chest holds two sets of common clothes, a water skin filled with wine, and a pouch con taining 3d6 gp and 4d10 sp. j26. LOCKERS Heartbreake r and He/Jraiser only Lining this hall are eight closets used as storage lock ers by the workers and performers of the Sea Maidens Faire. They contain traveling clothes and outerwear hanging on hooks, as well as boots and shoes. j27. SMOKEPOWDER STORAGE lleartbreaker and Hel/raiser only The locked door to this forward cabin has a wooden sign nailed to the outside that reads, in Common and El vish, "RESTRICTED AREA. DO NOT ENTER." The room contains the following features: <' llAP1 ER 7 I MAESTRO' S l·ALL Twenty wooden kegs are secured to the walls with ropes. Each keg has a paper label, written on which are the words "SMOKEPOWDER! EXPLOSIVE!" in Common and Elvish. • A shelf above the kegs is lined with wooden boxes. Boxes. Ten wooden boxes on the shelf each contain one hundred pistol bullets. Kegs. Each keg holds five pounds of smokep owder (sec appendix A). When one keg explodes, all other kegs within the area of effect explode as well. If half the kegs explode at once, the blast blows a hole in the forward hull large enough to sink the ship. If all twenty kegs explode at once, the blast blows half the ship to smither eens, shatters windows throughout the Dock Ward, and can be heard as far away as the Field Ward. j28. WALK-IN CLOSETS Eyecatcher only The doors to these closets are locked from the outside. Port Closet. This closet abutsjarlaxle's cabin (area j30) and contai ns tailored outfits and cloaks for every season and occasion, as well as towels. Against the back wall stands a wooden mannequin wearing an eye patch. A secret door along one wall can be detected with a suc cessful DC 15 Wisdom (Pe rception) check. Starboa rd Closet. This closet abuts the guest cab in (areaj29) and contains a half-dozen gowns and two soft fur cloaks on hangers, ladies' hats on hooks, and fancy towels and shoes on shelves . A secret door along one wall ca n be detected with a successfu l DC 15 Wisdom (Perceptio n) check. j29. GUEST CABIN Eyecatcher only This richly appointed cabin is set aside for special guests. It contains a large bed, a wooden chest, a free standing mirror, and a dresser with a lyre atop it. Empty wine bottles roll back and forth across the Door as the ship moves. The bed holds three giggling figures: • jarlaxle Baenre (see appendix B), in the guise of Zardoz Zord (absent if he's marshalling the Day of Wonders parade; see "Special Events," page 145) • Margo Verida, a female Amnian human bard (see appendix 8) • Khafeyta Murzan, a female Mulhorandi human swas hbuckler (see appendix 8) Margo and Khafeyta both joined the Sea Maidens Faire within the past year - Margo as a lyrist, Khafeyta as an acrobat. Jarlaxle has taken a romantic interest in both women, who are also in love with each other. Margo and Khafeyta are polite but terse. Both arc neu tral good. If attacked, they grab their weapons and other belongings and Dee through a secret door (see below). rr separated fromjarlaxle and compelled to divulge information about their host. Margo and Khafeyta reveal some or all of the following facts: • Zardoz Zord is a drow namedjarlaxle in disguise. • Each ship in the Sea Maidens Faire is crewed by drow. The ships' figureheads cast illusions on the drow, making them appear human.

## Page 142

• Jarlaxle wants the Lords' Alliance to recognize his city, Luskan, as a new member, and he wants to push Neverwinter out of the alliance. • A year ago. the Sea Maidens Faire visited the island nation ofLantan, whereJarlaxle obtained a Lantanese submarine and several clockwork servants . Secr et Door. A secret door leading to a walk-in closet (areaJ28) can be found with a successful DC 15 Wis dom (Perception) check. Treas ure. Margo's lyre is worth 30 gp. An unlocked chest at the foot of the bed holds four sets of costume clothing and a jewelry box containing six gold bracelets (worth 25 gp each), two diamond rings (worth 250 gp each). and a pearl necklace (worth 500 gp). J30. ZARooz ZoRo's CABIN Eyecatcher only The doors to this cabin are locked. If anyone other than Jarlaxle turns the handle of either door, a magic mouth spell activates and shouts, "By Lolth's teeth, have you no manners?'' The sound is loud enough to be heard by Jar laxle (if he is in area J29), and he comes to investigate. The room contains the following features: • The sweet smell of lavender permeates the cabin. (The scent is created by magic and can be dispelled.) • A oimbl ewri ght (see appendix B) stands in a small al cove next to a chess table. An empty wine bottle on the table is labeled "One-Eyed Jax" in Common . Behind a purple curtain, a bed is covered by a soft blue blanket and matching pillows. Next to the bed is a wooden chest with clawed feet. Nimbl ewrigh t. The nimblewright servesjarlaxle as a servant, and it obeys its master's commands without question. Absent orders, it attacks anyone who discovers the trapdoor in the floor (see below). Secre t Doors . Any character who searches the cabin and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check finds a secret door leading to a walk-in closet (areaj28) and a secret trapdoor in the floor. The trapdoor has an arcane loci<. spe ll cast on it, but rapping on it three times suppresses the spell for l min ute. Alternatively, the trapdoor can be forced open with a successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics) check. Below the trapdoor, a metal ladder descends to the bottom of a 10-foot-long, 3-foot-diameter steel tube with a circular metal hatch at the bottom. The hatch is opened by turning its valve wheel, which grants access co area Ul on the Scarlet Marpenoth. This area is magi cally pressurized to keep water from entering the ship if the hatch is opened while the submarine isn't docked. Treas ure. The chess set features jade pieces shaped like drow and is worth 2,500 gp. j3l. TRAINING AREA Eyecatcher only jarlaxl e trains here regularly. The space contains the following features: Ropes are strung throughout the area like webs. • Four rapiers hang from a wooden rack attached to the mast. Five beat-up mannequins made of wood, straw, and canvas stand about the room. Each holds a wooden sword and a wooden shield . A dartboard mounted on one wall has a shiny dagger sticking into it. Attack Mann equin s. As a bonus action, Jarlaxle can command the five magic mannequins to animate and attack a single target of his choice. Each mannequin has the statistics of anim ated armor. Mannequins that take damage become inanimate untilJarlaxle uses another bonus action to reanimate them. A mannequin targeted by a mending cantrip regains 1 hit point. Dagger. The dagger in the dartboard is a +1 dagger. Ropes. The ropes make all parts of this area difficult terrain. As part of its movement, a creature can maneu ver around the ropes with a successful DC 15 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check, negating the ropes' effect for that creature until the end of its turn. J32. j ARLAXLE'S SAUNA Eyecatcher only The door to this room is closed with an exte rior hook latch. When the door is opened, clouds of steam bil low out from the area beyond. This steam is created magically and can be dispelled with a success ful cast ing of dispel magic (DC 14). The room holds only a wooden bench. Steam. The steam has no adverse effect for the first hour. For eac h additional hour spent in this room, a creature must s ucceed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or gain one level of exhaustion. Creatures im mune to fire damage automatically succeed on this save.

### Scarlet Marpenoth

Jarlaxlc's submarine, the Scarlet Marpenoth, is mounted underneath the Eyecatcher and can be seen only by creatures under the water. Jarlaxle retreats here if the Eyecatcher comes under attack.

### Drow Crew

The magic that conceals the true appearance of drow aboardjarlaxle's ships doesn't exte nd to the Scarlet Marpenoth. Characters who encounter drow while sneaking around the submarine are questioned. If the drow don't get the answers they want, they attack. Any nearby drow who hear a fight break out will investigate and team up to repel boarders.

### Gnome E Ngineers

Rock gnome engineers maintain and operate the Scarlet Marpenoth. These gnomes are appr enti ce wizards (see appendix B), with these changes: The gnomes are neutral good. They are Small and have 7 (2d6) hit points each. • They have these racial traits: They have advantage on all Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws against magic. Their walking speed is 25 feet. They have darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. They spea k Common and Gnomish. CHAPTER 7 I MAESTRO'S FA Li

## Page 143

l square = 5 feet MAP 7.2: Sc; ARLE T MllRPENO T H The gnomes know a great deal about submarines and very little about everythin g else. They are treated well by jarlaxle, but a successful DC 15 Charisma (Intimi dation) check or a bribe of I 00 gp or more can convince a gnome to s urrende r its master keys, tamper with the engine, or pilot the submarine as the characters direct.

### Submarine Features

The Scarlet Marpenoth has AC 20, 300 hit points, a damage threshold of 15, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. Tbe submarine's structural integrity fails when the vessel drops to 0 hit points, whereupon it floods and sinks. The submarine is worth 15,000 gp intact and requires at least one pilot and one engineer to ope rate. It has a maximum speed of 2 miles per hour and can hold up to 10 passengers plus 2 tons of cargo. The subma rine has the following general features: • fnterior spaces are unlit. (The drow and the gnomes rely on darkvision to see.) • All furnis hings and features are bolted down. Chambers are 8 feet high, with 6-foot-high passages and doorways connecting them. Air magically circulates through a complex ventilation system and sma ll metal grills set into the floors. Doors are made of steel and have AC 19, 27 hit points, a damage threshold of 10, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. A door's lock can be picked by a char acter who makes a successful DC 18 Dexterity check using thieves' tools. A door can be forced open by a chara cter who succeeds on a DC 25 Strength (Athlet- <' ll APTER 7 I MAEST RO'S FALL ics) check. jarlaJCle and the gnomes aboard the Scarlet Marpenoth have keys to all locked doors. All doors are airtight while closed.

### Areas Of The Scarlet Marpenoth

The following locations are keyed to map 7.2. Ul. ENTRANCE HATCH Characters descending from Zardoz Zord's cabin on the Eyecatcher (areaj30) arrive in this chamber. From this side, the circula r metal hatch is opened by turning its valve wheel. This area is magically pressurized to keep water from entering the Scarlet Marpenoth if the hatch is opened while the submarine isn't docked to the Eye catcher. But if both the outer hatch and the inner door are opened underwater, the submarine will flood.

### U2. Engine Room

The door to this area is locked. A plaque on the door reads "ENGINE ROOM" in Common and Gnomish. The room has the following feat ures: The engine room is filled with machines that hiss, whir, and clatter constantly. A rock gnome named Breena Baffiestone monitors the machinery at all times. Nearby is a copper speaking tube, which en ables her to communica te with the control room com mand center (area U7b). • Drawers in the walls contain screwdrivers, wrenches, and other tools.

## Page 144

• To port and starboard, 3-foot-high, 21"2-foot-wide passageways lead deeper into the machinery. Me dium creatures must squeeze to move th rough these passages. Machin ery. The engine is a quasi -magical machine that controls the submarine's propulsion and depth and powers the fins and rudder that control direction. A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura of transmutation magic throughout the area. A chara cter who has proficiency with tinker's tools can use the tools to disable the engine with a successful DC 15 Intelligence check. The same check reactivates the disabled engine. Whether it succeeds or fails, each check represents 10 minutes of work. The engine can also be destroyed. Jt has AC 16, 50 hit points, and immu nity to poison and psychic damage. U3. SoLuu N's STATEROOM If he has not been encounte red and disposed of else where, a drow gunslinger named Soluun Xibrindas (see appendix B) is here, worshiping before a shrine of Lolth. His stateroom has the following features: • The port alcove contains a net hammock and a steel footlocker. A black metal shrine ofLolth covered in tiny spider statuettes stands against one wall. Al its top is a sculp ture of the demon goddess, with the head and upper body of a female drow and the lower body of a spider. • A Lantanese diving suit hangs in the closet to the south. Divin g Suit. This experimental device consists of a pressure-resistant padded suit, made of canvas with iron fittings and iron gauntlets. A fishbowl helmet at· taches to the suit's collar and functions as a cap of water breathing. Treasure . The shrine weighs 50 pounds and is worth 125 gp as an art object. The footlocker contains a pouch holding 50 gp and a potion of healing. The potion's crys tal flask, shaped like a spider, is worth 25 gp. U4. jARLAXLE'S STATEROOM The door to this tidy cabin is locked. The cabin contains the following features: • The scent of lavender magically permeates the cabin. (The scent is created by magic and can be dispelled.) • A hammock is suspended in the starboard alcove. A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals that the wall behind the hammock radiates an aura of trans mutation magic. Other furnishings include a tall harp with a stool nearby, a harpsichord with a matching bench, a free standing mirror, and a large wooden trunk. Closet. The locked closet aft of the cabin contains a wooden rack stocked with sixty bottles of wine. Each one is a rare vintage worth 25 gp. Magic Window. Touching the wall behind the ham mock renders the wall transparent from this side. and touching it again makes this "window" go away. When the wall is transparent, creatures in the cabin can see out, but creatures outside the submarine can't see in. Wooden Trunk. The trunk isn't locked. Lifting the lid causes panels in the front and sides to open, releasing a swarm of mechanical spiders that attacks anyone other than Jarlaxl e. This swarm has the statistics of a swarm of insects (spiders), with these changes: • The swarm is made up of Tiny constructs. It doesn't require air. food, drink, or sleep. • The swarm has vulnerability to lightning damage, is immune to exhaustion, and can't be charmed, frightened, paralyzed, petrified, knocked prone, or poisoned. The chest has a secret compartmen t in the bottom that can be detected and opened with a successful DC 13 Wisdom (Pe rception) check. If jarlaxle has the Stone o!Go!orr. he keeps it in the secret compartment, along with any magic items he might have claimed from the characters. The compartment is otherwise empty.

### U5. Fel'Rekt'S Stateroom

If he has not been encountered and defeated elsewhere, a drow gunslinger named Fel'rekt Lafeen (see appendix B) is here, cleaning his pistol. His stateroom contains a net hammock and a steel footlocker . Treas ure. Fel'rekt's footlocker contains 65 gp in a pouch, a comb carved from dragon bone (worth 5 gp), and a pair of obsidian dice (worth 25 gp).

### U6. Krebby G'S Stateroom

lf he has not been encountered and defeated elsewhere, a drow gunslinger named Krebbyg Masq'il'yr (see ap pendix B) is here, sharpening his sword. His stateroom contains a net hammock and nothing else.

### U7. Control Room

The control room has two levels: an observation deck (U7a) and a command center (U7b), with two ladders running between levels. Two circular soundproof windows are embedded in the port and starboa rd bulkheads. The window panes are made of glassteel, a resilient metal magically rendered transparent. Curious merfolk who live in Deepwater Harbor investigate the subma rine from time to time, and might be seen peering through the windows. U7a. Observation Deck. If jarlaxle Baeore (see appendix B) is forced to retreat to the submarine, he is here when the characters first arrive. The observation deck is an elevated. 10-foot-high metal platform with a grilled noor, supported by two metal columns. Two padded swivel chairs are bolted to the deck, which is enclosed by a thin steel railing. The height of each chair can be adjusted to accommodate a Small or Medium creature. Between the two chairs is a bronze periscope that can be raised or lowered whenever the submarine is detached from the Eyecatcher. U7b. Command Center. Three rock gnome engineers named Lorella Middenpump , Tervaround Waggletop, and Anverth Leffery are on duty here, along with two r drow elite warriors named Karabal L'enz and Marro Qaz'arrt. The drow guard the contro l room and keep the gnomes on task. Lorella sits in the pilot's swivel chair, which is bolted to the floor and can be lowered or raised to CHAPTER 7 I MAESTRO'S fA LL

## Page 145

accommodate a Small or Medium creature. The chair is situated before a panel of dials, levers, and buttons. Ter varound and Anverth stand by the back wall, monitoring gauges and performing system checks. A copper speak ing tube enables them to communicate with Breena Baffiestone in the engine room (area U2). The gnomes can pilot the Scarlet Marpenoth with out needing to make a check. Any other creature must succeed on a DC 20 Jntelligcnce check to figure out the controls. From the control panel, the pilot can detach the submarine from the Eyecatcher, as well as cont rol its speed, direction, and depth. The pilot can electrify the outer hull for 1 minute, after which the system re quires 1 hour to recharge. Any creature that comes into contact with or starts its turn in contact with the outer hull when it's electrified must make a DC 15 Dexterity check, taking 22 {4dl0) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature wearing metal armor has disadvantage on this saving throw.

### U8. Engineers' Staterooms

Each of these four compartments contains an off-duty rock gnome engineer sleeping in a small hammock, beneath which are two steel footlockers. The four rock gnomes are named Cockaby Fapplestamp, Ellywick Fiddlefen, Gcrbo Reese, and Zaffrab Horcusporcus. Footlockers. Each footlocker belongs to a partic ular gnome engineer stationed aboard the Scarlet Marpenoth. Both contain folded clothes sized for a

### Ch Apter 7 I Maestro'S Fall

gnome. One of them also holds a set of grease-stained overalls and a set of tinker's tools that belong to the gnome asleep in the bunk. There is a 25 percent chance that a footlocker also contains a clockwork toy, a fire starter, or a music box (as described in the "Rock Gnome" section in chapter 2 of the Player's Handbook).

### U9. Din !Ng Room

This room has the following features: • A walnut dining table is surrounded by eight padded swivel chairs. The height of each chair can be adjusted to accommodate a Small or Medium creature. • Soft, ambient music fills the room, created by magic. UlO. GALLEY This room has the following features: • An iron stove sits in one corner. In the opposite corner stands a steel food preparation table with utensils dangling above it. Built into the ta ble is a lidded steel box attached to a pedal on the floor below. When the pedal is pumped, water and moving brushes scrub dishes and utensils that have been placed into the box. A cart holds cutlery and dishes. Ull. PANTRY Metal shelves lining the walls hold fresh fruit, vegeta bles, casks of wine, and meat. Two steel barrels (one containing ale, the other drinking water) stand beneath the shelves.

## Page 146

### U12. Privy

This privy has a toilet and a washb asin, both attached to pipes. Above the basin is a hinged mirr or, behind which is a compartment containing soa p and towels. Ul3 . AIR SYSTEM The door to this area is locked. A plaque on this door reads "AIR SYSTEM" in Common and Gnomish. The room has the following features: • The area is filled with machines that hiss, wh ir, and clatte r constantly. • Drawers in the walls contain screwdr ivers, wrenches, and other tools. To port and starboa rd, 3-foot-high, 2~-foot-wide pas sage ways lead deeper into the machinery. Creatures that are Medium or larger must sq ueeze to move through these passages. Machinery. The quasi -magical machinery in this a rea gene rates and circu lates fres h air throughout the sub marine. A detect magic spe ll or simila r magic reveals an aura of conjuration magic throughout the area. A cha racter who has proficiency with tinker's tools can use them to disable the machinery with a s uccess ful DC 15 Intelligence check. The same check reactivates the disabled machinery . Whether it succeeds or fails, each check repr esents 10 minutes of work. The machin ery ca n also be dest royed. It has AC 16, 50 hit points, a nd immunity to poison and psychic damage. When this machinery shuts down, air stops pumping thro ughout the vessel. Unless the air syste m is reacti vated, creat ures trapped in the s ubmarine that need oxy gen to breath e will begin to s uffocate after two days (see "Su ffocatin g" in chapte r 8 of the Player's Handbook).

### Speci Al Even Ts

You ca n use one or more of the following events if the characters take an interest in the Sea Maidens Faire.

### The Friendly D Ragon

This encounter can be used as the charact ers approach the Eyecatcher. Read: In the water ahead, a large shape speeds toward you. As it gets closer, you recognize it as a dragon with bronze-colored scales. Slewing to a stop, the creature gives a toothy grin, then raises a claw in a small wave. "Well met!" it chirps. Zelifarn, a young bronze dra gon, recently moved into Deepwater Harbor. He has spent the past several month s scouring wrecks at the bottom of the harb or for treasure and stas hing precious baubles in a hidden underwater cave. Recently, he noticed a strange craft mounted on the underside of the Eyecatcher. His at tempts to treat with the crew have met with no s uccess, but he's curious to know more. Since the cha racters appea r to be headed toward a rendezvous with the Eye catcher, Zelifarn would like them to find out all they can about the underwater vessel without rais ing suspicion. The dragon promise s to meet them aga in after they have comp leted their mission. In exchange for information, he offers to give the party a barnacle-covere d chest that he found rece ntly. He hasn't opened it yet, so its contents are unknown to him, but he can s mell gold inside.

### Treasure

Zelifarn approaches the cha racters aga in as they leave the Eyecatcher. If they tell him more about the contents of the submarine and he believes that they're being truthful , he gives them the promise d reward: an old chest with a rusted lock tha t can be busted or pried ope n with a successful DC 13 Strength (Athletics) check. It contains 300 s p plus a golden amulet shaped like an oc topus with ame thyst eyes (worth 250 gp). A sec ret compar tment in the chest's lid can be found with a successful DC 11 Wisdom (Perception) check. 1t conta ins a sto pper ed wooden scroll tube that holds a spe ll scroll of revivify.

### A Night To Remember

If the chara cters stake out the ships of the Sea Maidens Faire, they observe strange activity on the pier during the ir first night of surveillance: A thick fog unexpectedly rises along the water, engulfing vessels and docks alike. As the gray miasma thickens, the creaking sound of shifting ships becomes increasingly haunting. Suddenly, you spot three shadows gliding through the gloom like elves slipping through a forest. Where they came from and where they're going, you don't know. The shadowy figures are the three drow gunslingers Fel'rekt Lafeen, Krebbyg Masq'il'yr, and Soluun Xibrin das (see appendix B). If any of these drow are dead or otherwis e indispos ed, replace them with drow elit e warriors . The drow used the cover of the fog to come asho re in one of the Eyecatcher's rowboats. The boat is tied off at the end of the pier between the Heartbreaker a nd the Hell raiser. These Brega n D'aerth e spies are on their way to a secret meeting with Laera l Silverhand (see appendix B). The Open Lord is waiting for them in an alley in the Dock Ward, under the cloak of an invisibility spell. She remains invisible for the entire meet ing. Harper spies in Luskan recent ly warned Laeral that jarlaxle might be in Waterdeep. She reached out to him with a sendina spe ll to arrange th is meeting, in the hope of finding out his plans. The characters can follow the drow spies to the rend ezvous. If the drow realize they're being followed, they mak e no effort to shake their pursu ers. If they're attack ed, they scatter and try to complete their mission before heading back to the Eyecatcher. lf a battl e erupts and escape appea rs impossible, the drow fight to the death. A City Watch patrol consisting of six vete ran s arrives ld4 minutes later to make arrests . CHAPTER 1 f MAESTRO'S FALL

## Page 147

jARLAXLE 1

### S Letter

One of the Bregan D'aerthe spies ca rries a letter for Laeral. It bears the wax seal of Luskan and is written in jarlaxle 's elegant hand, in Elvish. It reads as follows: To Her Ageless Majesty, Laeral Silverhand, the Witch Queen of Stornanter, Lady of the North, She of the Seven Sisters, Chosen of Mystra. and Open Lord of Waterdeep: Your spies are to be commended! Rest assured, my presence in your fair city is purely recreational-though if fortune smiles upon me, this visit could benefit us both. Your predecessor left the City of Splendors in a sorry state, but you have done wonders to lift the spirit of the citizenry during your short time in office. I know how politics offends you, so forgive me for taking this oppor tunity to point out the obvious. We can make both our cities stronger and strike back at he who robbed Waterda vians of their wealth and dignity. I'm speaking, of course, of that dirty sack of rats, Dagult Neverember. That's the phrase you used to describe him yesterday to the emis sary from Mirabar, is it not? Evidently, my spies are also to be commended! Why let Neverember get away with his crimes against Luskan and Waterdeep? Can we be allies, if not friends? These are the questions that haunt my dreams, as surely as I haunt yours. Sincerely, Laeral isn't surprised thatjarlaxle lacks the courage to meet her in person. She thanks the drow messengers for delivering the letter, cautions them to mind the City Watch and the City Guard, and heads back to the Palace ofWaterdeep. The drow spies return whence they came.

### Conversation With Laeral

If Laeral becomes aware of the characters, she appears before them and asks what business they have with Bre gan D'aerthe. If the characters have not met the Open Lord before, she might impress them with her plain spoken manner and lack of pretense. Alone and outside the political maelstrom, she acts more like an adven turer than a city official. 1f the characters inquire about the letter, she shows it to them and asks their opinions on Luskan's joining the Lords' Alliance. In her mind, Luskan is a greedy pirate stale that can't be trusted under any circ umstances . If the characters feel similarly, she trusts them enough to ask for their help in finding and securing Lord Neverem ber's hidden cache of dragons. In exchange. she prom ises them a 5,000 gp rewa rd and Waterdeep's gratitude.

### D Ay Of Wonders Parade

The Day of Wonders is the grandest parade of the fall season. andjarlaxle wants the Sea Maidens Faire to be a part of it. In the guise of Zardoz Zord. he pays a CllAPTl!R 7 I MAESTRO'S FALL visit the day before the holiday lo the House of Inspir ed Hands. Waterdeep's temple of Gond, to coordinate with the acolytes in charge of organizing the parade. He pre sents a detailed plan that commingles the attractions of the Sea Maidens Faire with the bizarre inventions of the temple - a plan that is well received. The evening before the Day of Wonders. workers be gin assembling the wagons and floats of the Sea Maid ens Faire on the pier. Early the following morning, the docks are a hive of activity as performers practice their routines and caged creatures arc offloaded one by one. An hour before highsun on this crisp and windy autumn day, the Sea Maidens Faire makes its way to the House of Inspired Hands to meet up with the Gond worshipers and their contraptions. From there, the parade strikes out in earnest, marching through Waterdeep's streets to the chee rs of the local folk. Zardoz Zord serves as grand marshal, leading the parade on the back of a rain bow-feathered diatryma summoned using his feather of diatryma summoning (see appendix A). For jarlaxle, the parade is a chance to show off and be cheered; he has no ulterior motive for participating in the event. WHTLE THE Boss Is AWAY As the Sea Maidens Faire parades through Waterdeep, the charac ters can slip aboard one or more ofjarlaxJe's ships. If things turns violent aboard a ship, its captain uses a sending spell to contactjarlaxle.JarlaxJe is supremely confident that his crews can overcome any threat, so he doesn't rush to their defense at the first sign of trouble. Only if the characters do conside rable damage will he treat their attack as a setbac k. If the characters escape a confrontation on the ships but leave behind witnesses who can identify them, it takes Bregan D'aerthe several days lo track them down (assumiog jarlaxle hasn't already met them). Although killing the characters would be easy at that point.jar laxle would rather put them to work for him. He has them watched but doesn't provoke hostilities until such time as the reward clearly outweighs the risks.

### Escaped B Ear

The Sea Maidens Faire parade ends where it started - at the docks. As the attractions are being loaded back onto their ships, the Faire's polar bear gets loose, fleeing into the Dock Ward before its handlers can corner it. News of the escaped bear spreads quickly, and sightings are frequent. If the characte rs impressed one of the drow ship captains, he contacts them by way of a sending spell and asks for help. He wants the bear retrieved be fore the City Guard finds and kills it, offering a reward of either 250 gp or a potion of water breathing. The cha racte rs can track and corner the polar bear with a successfu l DC 16 Intelligence (Investigation) or Wisdom (Surviva l) check. Whether a check succeeds or fails, each attempt represents 1 hour of searching . If the characters find the bear within 4 hours, it can be lured back to the Sea Majdens Faire with food or a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Animal Handling) check. The captain then makes good on the promised reward. If the charac ters don't find the bear, members of the City Guard get to it first and kill it.
