# Chapter 8: Winter Wizardry

_Source pages: 148-163_

## Page 148

### Anshoon Yearns To Rule Water Deep

as a tyrant, take over the Zhentarim, and use both seats of power to plunder and control the Sword Coast. He needs the gold in the Vault of Dragons to pay off Masked Lords and Zhentarim lead ers whose support will be instrumental when the time comes to oust Lady Laeral Silverhand as Open Lord. Manshoon has a long list of powerful ene mies, among them the Harpers, Elminster of Shadow dale, Halaster Blackcloak of Undermountain, and the Blackstaff of Waterdeep. These enemies would quickly move against Manshoon if they learned he was biding in Waterdeep. For his evil plans to succeed, Manshoon must operate in the shado ws for the time being.

### Facing Manshoon

A head-on battle with Manshoon isn't likely to go well for the characters. That said, the wizard's greatest weak ness is that he has powerful enemies in Waterdeep. The risk of exposure keeps him hidden, and the characters can thwart him by furnishing his enemies with proof that he's alive (::iftcr a fashion) and operating in Water deep. When it comes to Manshoon clones, deciding to "let the city deal with it" is a wise course of action. If the characters find themselves at the evil wizard's mercy, Manshoon will gladly trade their pitiful lives for the Stone ofGolorr and the keys to unlock the Vault of Dragons. In exchange for helping him get the gold. he promises the characters 10 percent of the trove (50,000 gp). Manshoon has no intention of honoring this agree ment , but it can help buy the characters some time. If the characters manage to kill Manshoon and the local authorities are made aware of the act, no murder charges are filed. Rather, the characters' actions are cel ebrated. Laeral Silverhand summons them to the Palace of Waterdeep to thank them officially, in her capacity as Open Lord. Sometime later, Vajra Safahr invites them to BlackstafTTower to thank them for their service and offer them membership in Force Grey.

### Disr U Pt I Ng M Ans H Oon'S

### Ope Rati On

Characters can hinder Manshoon in the following ways.

### Release The Barlgura

1f the characters free the barlgura demon in area K15 and allow it to roam Kolat Towers, Manshoon loses many followers to the demon's rampage.

### R Eport Manshoon

Delivering proof that Manshoon is hiding in Waterde ep to Laeral Silverhand, Mirt, the Harpers, Force Grey, the Blackstaff, the Lords' Alliance, the Order of the Gaunt let, the City Watch, or the Watchful Order ofMagists and Protectors triggers a far-reaching effort to oust him Crom the city. Such proof can be obtained from any of Manshoon's lieutenants, who can be capt ured and CHAP"! ER 8 I W INTE R WI ZA RD RY

## Page 149

turned over for interrogation. These lieutenants include Sidra Romeir (area K2), Mana fret Cherryport (area K3). Urstul Floxin (area ES), Vevette Blackwater and Agorn Fuoco (area ES), and Havia Quickknife and Mookie Plush (area ElO). The ledger in area E13 also contains proof of Man shoon's malfeasance. Giving it to Laeral Silverhand, Vajra Safahr, Mirl, or a magister provides enough evi dence for them to act on. Once Manshoon's whereabouts are established, the City Guard cordons off and surrounds Kolat Towers. The Blackstaff and the Watchful Order assist as needed. lf the characters deactivated the force field, the siege is brief and Manshoon's forces are routed. If the force field remains in place, the Watchful Order can deactivate it. When all is said and done, Manshoon is forced to re treat to his cxtradimensional sanctum. From there, he continues his search for the Vault of Dragons while fend ing off attackers.

### Steal Manshoon'S Spellbook

Stealing the spellbook from area E13 causes Manshoon to slow his search for the Vault of Dragons while he either tries to replace it or sends a simulacrum (see ap pendix B) and other forces to retrieve it.

### Kolat Towers

This dilapidated, two-towered edifice stands tall in the Southern Ward. Its neighbors are aware of the magi cal force field that surrounds it, and they can see light from continual flame spells spilling out of the windows, C HAPT ER 8 I WI N'J l!.R WI 7..ARDRY Despite these persistent magical effects, most folk believe the structure is abandoned. Others think it's haunted by the ghosts of the Kolat brothers. They're wrong, of course. Manshoon posts no visible guards outside Kolat Towers, since he wants others to believe the site is aban doned. The evil wizard and his underlings come and go using teleportation circles inside the towers.

### Forc E Field

An invisible field of magical force surrounds and covers Kolat Towers. The field is paper-thin and stands just outside the outer wall of the estate, extending upward to contain the buildings in their entirety. Nothing can pass through the barrier. including air, fog, rain. and snow. Creatures that don't realize the field is there bounce off it, with birds especially prone to striking it. The ground outside the field is regularly littered with the tiny corpses of birds that broke their necks hitting it. and street cleaners come by every morning to sweep them up.

### Digging Under The Force Field

There are no openings in the force field, which extends 1 foot underground. It takes 1 hour for a character with a shovel to dig a hole deep enough for a Medium crea ture to squeeze through, going under the field to the other side of the towers' outer wall. Since Kolat Towers is surrounded by other buildings, there's a 75 percent chance that any digging attracts 2d6 members of the City Walch (veter ans), who pul a slop to it.

## Page 150

### Using Magic To B Ypass The Force Field

Characters can use magic such as a dimension door or misty step spell to teleport from one side of the force field to the other. A disintegrate spe ll or a successful dis pel magic (DC 19) spell cast at the field creates a 10-foot square opening that lasts for 1 minute.

### D Estroying The Force Field

A magic rune in area K18 generates the force field. De stroying that rune ends the effect.

### Kol At T Owers Featu Res

The following general features apply to Kolat Towers: • Kolat Towers is a multistory structure, with each level standing 20 feet higher than the one below it. Its rooms have 15-foot-high ceilings, with 7-foot-high doorways connecting them. • Climbing the outside walls without equipment re quires a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. Each of the doors in the towers , as well as the door in the outer wall, is made of iron-bound oak and has AC 16, 27 hit points, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. rf a door is locked, it ca n be picked by a char acter who makes a successful DC 15 Dexteriry check using thieves' tools, or it can be forced open with a s uccessfu l DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check . Man shoon, Mana fret Cherryport, and Havia Quickknife have keys to the locked doors. • Windows have leaded frames and dirty glass panes. They are latched from within and swing inward on iron hinges. A success ful DC 11 Dexterity check using thieves' tools opens a window from the outside. • Unless oth erwise noted, all areas are brightly lit by continual flame spells cast on wall sconces. • Some of the sta ircases in Kolat Towers are invisible. They are revealed by a see invisibility spell or similar magic. A creature traversing stairs it can't see can move on the ste ps at half speed without any problem. A creature that moves any faster than half speed must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check or slip, tumble down the stairs, and fall prone at the bot tom of them.

### A Reas Of Kol At Towe Rs

The following encounter locations are keyed to map 8.1. Kl . STO REROOM The outer door is locked from the inside, and the room has neither heat nor light sources. Crates stacked around the room are packed with meat, and bear the seal of the Fellowship of Salters, Packers, and joiner s.

### K2. D Ining Room

This room contains the following features: Three Zhcnt s in black armor sit around a stone dining table, playing Three -Dragon Ante (a card game). The table is set with silver. • Eight moth-eate n banners hang from the waJls. Each bears an arcane sigil that repr ese nts a different one of the eight schools of magic. Zhents. The card players are Sidra Romeir (LE fe male Calishite human vete ran) and two subordinates (LE male Tethyrian human thu gs). Since the force field around Kolat Towers keeps out riffraff, Sidra assumes the characters are guests of Manshoon arriving for a clandestine meeting. If the characters give her no reason to believe otherwise, s he and her thugs escort them wherever they ask to go. If it becomes clear that the characters don't belong in the towers , Sidra and her thugs attack. Combat in this area draws the attention of Manafret Cherryport in area K3, who investigates. Sidra wears a teleporter ring (see "Teleporter Rings," page 157). Treasure. Silverware on the table is worth 100 gp.

### K3. Kitchen

Mouthwatering scents fill this room , which contains the following features: • If he hasn't already been drawn elsewhere, a portly halfling stands atop a stool and cooks at an iron stove. • A green, ghostly hand floats above a trellis table, hold ing a knife and cutting carrots and celery. • A staircase curves up one wall, leading to area K7. Zhent Cook. The halfiing, Manafret Cherryport, is one of Manshoon's lieutenants. He loves to cook, and uses his mage hand cantrip to cut vegetables. He as sumes the characters are intruders unless convinced otherwise. Any ability check to do so is made with dis advantage, since Manafret knows that Manshoon would have informed him if guests were expected. If the mage suspects the characters are intrud ers, he surreptitiously pours a vial of assassin's blood (see "Poisons" in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master's Guide) into lhe stew before asking them to taste it and give him an honest critique. He then cries out to the guards in area K2 and attacks. Combat in this area draws the atte ntion of the Zhents in areas K2 and K7, who inves tigate. Mana fret is a lightfoot halHing mage, with these changes: • Manafret is neutral evil and has 31 (9d6) hit points. • He has these racial traits: He is Sma ll, and his walk ing speed is 25 feet. He can move through the space of a Medium or larger creature. He has advantage on saving throw s against being frightened. He speaks Common and Halfling.

### Kolat Towers Lore

With a successful DC l S Intelligence (History) check, a character can recall the following information about Kolat Towers. An NPC familiar with Waterdeep's history, such as Mirt or Volo, can also provide this information. • Kolat Towers once belonged to two eccentric brothers, Duhlark and Alcedor Kolat. Both were wizards. • Over time, the brothers discovered new ways to harness magic, but Ouhlark became paranoid that others might steal their secrets. He encased Kolat Towers in a magical force field. • Ouhlark's paranoia continued to grow, until he sus pected Alcedor of selling their secrets. Alcedor left the towers, never to be heard from again, and Duhlark be· came a recluse who died in his own fortress.

### Chap1Er 8 I Winter Wizardry

## Page 151

Manafrel wears a telcporter ring (see "Teleporter Rings," page 157). Treasure. A cupboard holds a dozen jars of herbs and spices. Among them is a flask labeled "Assassin's Blood," which contains six doses of the poison.

### K4. Musty L I Brary

This musty room is situated at the bottom of the main tower, and it has no door on level 1. It contains the fol lowing features: • A suit of dented plate armor stands in the center of the room. • Tomes are packed into built-in stone bookshelves, with a tall alcove above each shelf holding a gargoyle. (Two of these sculptures are living gargoyl es.) • An in-progress game of Dragonchess sits on a marble tab le in a reading nook. • A stone staircase spira ls up to area K6. Gargoyles. The two real gargoyles are indistingu ish able from the inanimate gargoy le statues in the high alcoves. When intruders start poking around the room, the gargoyles swoop down and attack. Tomes. Any character who spends an hour searching the bookshe lves finds a fat tome titled Flumph Mating Rituals, with an embossed image of two flumphs on the cover, their tendrils entwined. The cover is a false one, wrapping around a tome bound in dragon hide-a disguised spellbook that contains the following wiz ard spells: arcane lock, burning hands, comprehend languages, counterspell, darkvision, dimension door. find familiar, levitate. sending, and unseen servant. (You can replace any of these spells with a spell of the same level.) Treas ure. The Dragonchess set is made of band carved ivory and is worth 500 gp.

### K5. Garbage - Filled Room

This room is on level 1 of the outermost tower but isn't accessibl e from that floor. It reeks of garbage and has the following features: • Ankle-deep refuse fills the chamber. • Black sco rch marks stretch from floor to ce iling a long the walls a nd the sta irs, which lead up to a rea Kl O. Manshoon's servants throw thei r garbage here. The Kolat brothe rs created some magic items in this room, and an expe riment gone awry caused the scorch marks.

### K6 . Main Tower Landing And Ledge

Level 2 of the main tower has the following features: • A stone landing with no railings has a door leading to area K7 and a stone spiral stai rcase descending to a rea K4. An invisible staircase with no railings (see "Kolat Towers Features," page 149) hugs the wall as it climbs from the landing to area Kll. • Across from the landing, a wide stone ledge protrudes from the northeast wall beneath a window. A pair of identical wooden chests sits atop the ledge. (One chest is real. The other is a mimic .) Ledge. There's no easy way to access the ledge, which is 8 feet away from the landing and at the same height. CHA PTER 8 l WINT ER WI ZARD RY Characters can try to jump onto the ledge, or they can hook a rope onto the railing on the level above (area Kll) and swing across the gap. They can also use magic to cross. Anyone who falls off the landing or the ledge lands in area K4, 20 feet below. Mimi c. A character who touches the mimic becomes adhered to it. The mimic attacks if disturbed or when a character inspects the real chest next to it. Treasure. The genuine chest is unlocked and contains thirteen items, each of which can be used as an arcane focus: two crystals (worth 10 gp each), an orb (worth 20 gp), four rods (worth 10 gp each), and six wands (worth 10 gp each).

### K7. Reading Room

This room contains the following features: • A burly half-ore clad in black leather armor sits in an overstuffed chair in the northernmost corner of the room, reading a book. • Large framed pictures of cities and landscapes hang on the walls, and a worn, blood-spattered rug covers the floor. Other furnishings include a pair of rocking chairs, a couch, and an ottoman. Mouthwatering scents rise from a staircase that curves down to the kitchen (area K3). Zhent. Yorn the Terror is reading a copy of Volo:S Guide to Monsters, autographed on the title page by the author with an added note that reads, in Common: "For Yorn. I hope you find the ore chapter illuminating!" Yorn is a half-ore thug, with these changes: • Yorn is neutral evil. • He has these racial traits: When reduced to 0 hit points, he drops to 1 hit point instead (but can't do this again until he finishes a long rest). He has darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. He speaks Common and Ore. Yorn values his own well-being above all else. He is initially indifferent toward intruders. If Yorn believes the characters aren't a threat, he's happy to chat with them about the inhabitants and the layout of Kolat Towers. He has never visited Manshoon's extraplanar sanctum, but he does know that the teleportation circle in area K22 is the way to get there. Combat in this area draws the attention ofManafret Cherryport in area K3, who investigates. Treas ure. Yorn carries 36 cp, 20 sp, 12 gp, 8 taols, and a gem-studded ivory toothpick (worth 25 gp) in a pouch.

### K8. Apprentice Bedroom

This narrow room contains the following features: • Three single beds are bunched less than an arm's length apart beneath a staircase that leads up to area Kl2. • At the foot of each bed is a wooden chest. The Kolat brothers once took on apprentices, who slept here. Manshoon now allows his own apprentices Ered Payno, Havi Termock, and Savara Firethorn-to do the same. All three can be found in area Kl5. Treasure. Inside each chest is a set of common clothes, a spare spe ll component pouch, candles, ink,

## Page 152

Level 4 1 square = S feet Level 1

### Map 8.1: Kolat Towers

Level S Broken stafrs up to area K17 Main Tower Level 6 Outer Tower Level 3 Level4 CHAPTI:R 8 I \H:O."ffR WlZAIWR'l

## Page 153

pens, paper, and 3d6 gp. Each chest also holds a spell book that contains all the spells its owner has prepared . In addit ion, Ered's spellbook contains burning hands, knock, and lightning bolt; Ravi's spellbook contains charm person, detect thoughts, and major image; and Savara's spellbook contains comprehend languages, phantasmal force, and phantom steed .

### K9. Bridge And Walkway

A wooden bridge connects the two towers 20 feet above the ground, and a walkway attached to the br idge enc ir cles the outside of the outer tower. The bridge and the tower walkway lack railings. Thei r plan ks and stones groan and crack underfoot but are safe to walk on.

### Kio. W I Zard Statue

This level of the outer tower consists of a landing and a nar row ledge with the following features: The landing is to feet square and is met by two sta ir cases. One descends 20 feet to area KS, and one as cends 20 feet to area K20. • The narrow ledge built into the southeast wall has a life-size statue of a bearded human wiza rd standing atop it. The wizard looks angry and is leveling a stone wand at the door to area K9. Statue. The statue depicts Duh lark Kolat, and a detect magic spe ll or similar magic revea ls an au ra of transmutation magic around it. The first time a char acter steps onto the landing, the statue levitates 1 foot above the ledge and intones the following wa rning in Common : "I am Duhlark Kolat, the g reat wizard and master of this tower! How dare you invade my home! leave at once or be destroyed by magic beyond your comprehens ion!" The threat is empty, but the statue continues to levitate for 1 minute before sinking back down to the ledge. The magic resets after 1 hour. Wh ile it is levitating, the statue can be easily pushed or pulled aro und. Casting dispe l magic on the statue while it's floating causes it to fall, topple off the ledge, and shatter in a rea KS below. Anyone in that area when the statue falls must succeed on a DC 10 Dexter ity saving throw or take 22 (4d10) bludgeon ing damage. K l l. LABORATORY This room consists of a ledge connected to the levels above and below by invisible staircases (see "Kolat Tow ers Features," page 149). One stai rcase descends 20 feet to area K6, and the other climbs 20 feet to area KlS. The area contains the following features: • Shattered glass covers the floor, and a large wooden trellis table has been knocked on its side . • A large empty cabinet dominates the back wall. This laboratory has been picked clean by Manshoon and contains nothing of value. CHAPTER 8 I WINTER WlZARDRY

### Kj2 . Staff Display

This room contains the following features: A half-dozen staffs of various styles are hung proudly on the walls at the top of the landing. • A staircase descends to area K8. Staffs. Each staff is different in construction and style: a twisted birch branch, a sturdy oak dowel, a glittering haft of stone, a steel pole carved with blue runes, a dim pled coppe r staff topped with a copper crescent moon, and a blown-glass cane capped with a black marble orb. All six staffs an imate and attack interlopers who enter the area without being escorted by Manshoon or one of his lieutenants. The staffs have the same statistics as ftying swords , except they deal bludgeoning damage on a hit. If a fight breaks out in this area, the creatures in area K14 come to investigate. Kl3. HOLDING CELL The door to this room has a narrow , barred window set into it. The door is locked and trapped (see below). As the characters approach the door, read : A raspy voice calls out from beyond the door. "If you be good, let us rid these towers of evil's stench. If you be evil, open the door so we may battle, and my eterna l boredom can end." Beyond the door's barred window, a gargoyle lurks in a stone cell, challenging you in a low growl. "Come on, then!" Trapped Door. A glyph of warding spell has been cast on the door, set to trigger when it is opened by anyone other than Manshoon . The glyph, which resemb les an ornate letter M, can be found with a successful DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation) check. The glyph targets the creature that opens the door with a blindness/deafness spell (save DC 18). Lady Gondafrey. Duh lark Kolat long ago trapped a magica l expe riment in this cell: a gargoyle that has been imbued with the personality of a human knight of Tyr (god of justice) named Lady Gondafrey. This gar goyle has an Intelligence score of 10 and an a.lignment of lawful good. It speaks Common, and its face looks more humanoid than gargoyle. Manshoon is am used by the creature, so he keeps it alive but locked in the cell. If the characters free Lady Gondafrey, she offers to fight alongside them; however, she quickly turns against any character who exhibits cruel or unlawful behavior. She can offer helpful information about Kolat Towers, and she is familiar with both the layout of the towers and the current occupants of the place. She knows that Manshoon resides in an extraplanar sanctum access ible through a teleportation circle that his Lieutenants can activate using special rings. The gargoyle doesn't know where the teleportation circle is located , nor does she know why Duh lark transferred her consciousness into her present form. The gargoyle retains fragmented memories of the life of Lady Gondafrey, a native Waterdavian who served in the City Watch. After identifying Duhlark Kolat as a

## Page 154

suspect in several local disappearances. she darkened his doorstep in 1379 DR. the Year of the Lost Keep. Annoyed by this invasion of his privacy and not in his right mind, Duhlark captured Lady Gondafrey, used a spell to meld her form with that of a gargoyle, and im prisoned her. If the gargoyle travels with the party, roll a dlO each day at dawn. On a roll of 1, Lady Gondafrey's alignment becomes chaoti c evil for 24 hours as the gargoyle's in nate demeanor exerts itself. In this state, the creature tries to orchestrate the characters' deaths, going so far as to attack lone characters. Kl4 . SERVANTS ' QUARTERS This room contains the following features: • Furnishings include four beds, a small table with four chairs, and tattered window curtains. Four Zhent thu gs relax here-one trying to rest, two others playing cards, and the fourth sitting on the edge of a bed, re-stringing a heavy crossbow. The thugs work for Manshoon and leap up to attack anyone they don't recognize as one of their own. A suc cessful DC 17 Charisma (Deception) check convinces these Zhents that the characters are their allies. Treas ure. Resting in sma ll piles and neat stacks on the table are 74 cp, 52 sp, 19 gp, and 4 taols. Kl5 . SUMMONING CHAMBER This room is connected to the levels above and below by invisible staircases (see .. Kolat Towers Features," page 149), one descending 20 feet to area Kll and the other climbing 20 feet to area K16. This area contains the fol lowing features: • A 10-foot-diameter circle of runes has been drawn on the floor in blood that is now dried. Smoke billows from four iron braziers placed around the circle. Three appr enti ce wizards (see appendix B) stand out side the circle, chanting an incantation. A barlgura is slumped motionless within the circle. The three wizards here are Manshoon's app rentices Ered Payno (LE male Damaran human), Havi Termock (CE female Chondathan human), and Savara Firethorn (NE female Tethyrian human). Each wears a teleporter ring (see "Teleporter Rings ," page 157). The magical incantation that the three are reciting has quelled the barlgu ra and rendered it unconscious. If any of them stop chanting, the demon awakes and becomes enraged, though it remains bound within the circle. Whenever it takes damage, the barlgura can attempt a DC 10 Cha risma check. On a successful check, it breaks out of the circle and atcacks any creature it can reach. Freeing the barlgura disrupts Manshoon's operation, forcing the wizard to spend time and resources defeat ing the fiend and replacing slain underlings . Kl6. CONSTRUCT WORKSHOP The invisible staircase from area K 15 ends i o front of a closed door. The door is unlocked and opens into the room, which contains the following: • Bits of clay, stone, bone, and metal litter the floor and cover a wooden table in the middle of the room. • The floor creaks and tilts slightly when stepped on, and it can be seen to be detached from the walls. Two oversized iron clamps on opposite sides of the room hold the floor in place. Each of these rusty mecha nisms is attached to an iron lever. • A wooden staircase once climbed 20 feet to the next level, but it has partially collapsed. The Kolat brothers once crafted constructs in this workshop. The magical clamped tloor was built as a pre caution in case one of the experiments went berserk. When a creature that doesn't work for Mans hoon's Zhenta rim enters this room without being escorted, the metal scraps on the floor fly together, forming a suit of animat ed armor that attacks. When the armor is re duced to 10 hit points or fewer. it tries to pull one of the levers on its next turn. Floor Clamps. Pulling a lever is an action that causes both clamps to release the floor, which is then magically driven upward into the ceiling. Creatures standing on the floor are knocked prone and must make a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw as they slam into the ceiling, taking 22 (4dl0) bludgeoning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. The floor then settles a few feet below the ceiling, cutting off ac cess to the stairs down to area KlS but leaving charac ters free to climb up the collapsed staircase to area K17. (The magical floor was designed to prevent a berserk golem from reaching the lower chambers of the towers, and potentially the city beyond, while the Kolat brothers dealt with it.) After 10 minutes, the floor descends to its normal level and the clamps lock it down again. Partia lly Collapse d S tairs. A creature can climb the sta irs to area K17 with a successf ul DC 10 Dexter ity (Acrobatics) check. If the check fails, the creature falls 10 feet. K l7. FLESH GOLEM Th is unlit hallway contains the following features: Any character who inspects the hall for traps and suc ceeds on a DC 17 Wisdom (Perception) check notices I-inch-diameter holes drilled into the walls at ankle height, set at regular intervals along the length of the passage. • A flesh golem stands in front of the door lo area K18. • A one-way secret door is set into the innermost wall. Golem Trap. The flesh golem was created by Duh lark Kolat. Manshoon chose to leave it here and instructed his lieutenants not to disturb it. It moves to attack anyone other than Duhlark who approaches within IO feet of it. A character disguised as Duhlark (using the statue in area KIO as a model) can fool the golem with a successful DC 10 Charisma (Deception) check. The golem stands on a pressure plate. When it steps off the plate to attack someone out of its reach, the weight on the plate is lifted, causing poison gas to erupt from the holes in the walls. When the trap triggers, each creature in the haJI must make a DC 12 Constitution saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison damage on a failed saving throw, or half as much damage on a successful one. The gas lingers for 1 minute unless dispersed with a gust of wind spell or similar magic. While the gas CHAl'TJ::R 8 I WINTER WIZARDR'

## Page 155

NllT, .JENK,, ANO 5(lUIOO~V MllKE T"'E BEST OF WATEROEEP'S MARSM WINTER .

## Page 157

persists, a creature in the hall must repeat the saving throw at the start of each of its turns. The golem is im mune ro the poison gas. One-Way S ecret Door. A character who makes a suc cessful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check notices the secret door that leads to area K19. This door opens nor mally only from inside area Kl9, and only a knock spell or similar magic can force it open from this side. Kl8. ARCANE RUNE This unlit hall is choked with dust and cobwebs . It con tains the following features: • An elaborate rune is inscribed on the back wall at the southern most end of the hall. (The rune isn't visible from the doorway to area Kl 7.) • A secret door is set into the innermost wall. Arcane Rune. A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals a powerful aura of conjuration magic around the rune. A successful DC 15 intelligence (Arcana) check confirms that this rune sustains the force field around Kolat Towers, and that the rune can be destroyed. It has AC 10, 22 hit points, and immunity to poison and psy chic damage. The rune can't be dispelled normally. but each successful dispel magic cast on it (DC 19) deals 16 (3d10) force damage to it. The first time damage is dealt to the rune, a red slaad magically springs forth from it and attacks aU creatures in the hallway. When the rune is destroyed, the force field around Kolat Towers disappears. Secre t Door. A character who makes a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check notices the secret door that leads to area K 19. Kl9. DUHLARK 1

### S Bedroom

This room is accessible through either of the secret doors that lead to areas Kl7 and Kl8. It conta ins the following features: A Oameskull bobs in the middle of the room, which is choked with dust and cobwebs. • An oval canopy bed veiled in cobwebs sits across from two narrow bookshelves. • The room smells like a tomb. Manshoon found Duhlark Kolat's skeletal remains in the bed and transformed his skull into a flameskull. He left the rest of the bones alone, hidden behind cobwebs. The fiameskull attacks anyone other than Manshoon who confronts it. shoutin g, "Get out of my house!" be tween casting spells and throwing off fire rays. Bookshelves. Manshoon removed any tomes of value from the bedroom, leaving noticeable gaps on the shelves between mundane books on a variety of eso teric subjects. Among the volumes on one shelf is a false book titled The Man from Damara- a wooden block painted to re semble a book, which is wired to a secret compa rtment in the base of the shelf. A character can detect the shelf and discern how to open it with a successful DC 15 Wis dom (Perception) check. Tugging on the book causes the C ll APTER 8 I WI NTER WIZARDRY compartment to pop open, revealing Duhlark's wand of binding hidden inside.

### K20. Alcedor'S Private Library

This room has the following features: • A tall oak booksh elf contains a few scattered books (all mundane and worthless) , but is mostly bare. Above the bookshelf hangs a beautifully crafted sign that reads "Alcedor" in Common. • A staircase descends 20 feet to area KlO.

### K21. Duhlark'S Private Library

This room has the following features: • A tall oak bookshelf holds a few dozen books. Above the bookshelf hangs a beautifully crafted sign that reads "Duh lark" in Common. • A staircase ascends 20 feet to area K22. Bookshelf. The bookshe lf holds thirty books in total. If any of them are disturbed, they fly off the shelves and form a swarm that attacks all creatures in the room. The book collection has the statistics of a swarm of bats, with these changes: The books lack the Echolocation and Keen Hear ing traits. Replace the swarm's Bites attack option with a Slam attack option that deals the same amount of bludgeon ing damage. If there are no creatures to attack on its turn , the book collection returns to the bookshel f. The books are other wise nonmagical and cover a wide array of subjects.

### K22. Teleportation Circle

A staircase rising from area K21 leads to this highest chamber of the outer tower. It contains the follow ing features: • A spectator floats in the middle of the room, and four flying snak es flutter above the rafters. • Runes inscribed on the floor form a large, faintly glow ing circle. • Five wooden treasure chests with sturdy padlocks rest against the walls. Guardian s. The spectator guards the treasure chests and attacks intruders who aren't being esco rted by Man shoon or one of his lieutenants. The flying snakes join tbe battle, fighting as allies of the spectator. Teleportation Circle. The teleportation circle func tions as described under the spell of the same name in the Player's Handbook. Additionally, a creature wearing a teleporter ring (see "Teleporter Rings," page 157) can use this circle to access the teleportation circle in Manshoon's sanctum (area El}. A teleporter ring that is brought within 5 feet of the circle begins to hum softly. Treasure Chests. The padlocks on the chests are illusory but feel real to the touch. A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura of illusion magic around each one. Attempts to pick or break the locks fail, but a knock spell or similar magic causes a lock to open . Chest l has the image of an anvil carved into its lid. It contains a set of smith's tools (worth 20 gp).

## Page 158

Chest 2 has iron bands and contains a set of painter's supplies (worth 10 gp), as weU as three small pots of col ored paint (blue, red, and yellow). Chest 3 has tiny clawed feet and contains six blank spellbooks with leather covers (worth 50 gp each). Chest 4 has a Bat lid with a city scene painted on it. It contains a scholar's pack (worth 40 gp) and a book of Dwarvish phrases. A character who doesn't speak Dwarvish can use the book to communicate on a rudi mentary level with friendly dwarves. Chest 5 is inlaid with silver and topped with a silver statuette of a rearing hippogriff (worth 25 gp). Inside is a wooden rack that holds eight glass vials-six containing potions of healing and two containing individual doses of essence of ether (see "Poisons" in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). The poison can be identified with a successful DC 13 Intelligence (Nature) check.

### Extradimens Ional

### Sanctum

Manshoon's extradimensional sanctum exists in a finite demiplane. Created by the original Maoshoon, i t is known to the wizard's clones, and it currently serves as the lair of the clone described in this adventure. Outside Manshoon's sanctum, the demiplane is a vast void filled with swirling purple mist. Any creature that enters this mist is teleported to area El and must make a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, taking 22 (4dl0) force damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. There are no cardinal directions in this extrad imen sional space; compasses spin futilely in the absence of north, south, east, and west.

### Sanctum Features

These features apply to all areas in the extradimen sional sanctum: • Rooms have 10-foot-high ceilings, with 8-foot-high passages and 7-foot-high doorways connecting them. The walls, floors, and ceilings throughout are made of seamless alabaster. • Doors are made of iron and have AC 19, 27 hit points, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. A locked door can be picked by someone who makes a suc cessful DC 17 Dexterity check using thieves' tools, or can be forced open with a successfu l DC 25 Strength (Athletics) check. As an action, Manshoon or his simulacrum can lock or unlock any door in the sanc tum by touch. • Except where noted, areas of the sanctum are brightly lit by continua/ flame spells cast on wall sconces.

### A Reas Ofthesanctum

The following locations are keyed to map 8.2. El. ARRIVAL POINT This room is the extradimensional sanctum's anchor to the Material Plane, and one can teleport to this chamber

### Teleport Er Rings

To access Manshoon's extraplanar sanctum, one needs a teleporier ring: a brass signet ring bearing a stylized M, and which emanates an aura of conjuration magic when tar geted by a detect magic spell or similar magic. Manshoon gives these rings to his most trusted servants . As an action, a creature wearing a teleporier ring can ac tivate the teleportation circle either in area K22 or area El, teleporting itse lf and up to six other willing creatures from one circle to the other. from other places on the Material Plane. The room has the following features: • A teleportation circle is inscribed on the alabaster floor here. Characters teleported to this area from area K22 appear within the circle . • The ceiling and three of the walls are made of 6-inch tbick sheets of transparent glass, through which the swirling purple mist that fills the demiplane can be seen. The fourth wall is made of alabaster and has a locked iron door set into it (leading to area E2). • A black-robed female human with a bald, scarred head watches this room through a glass window set into the wall of another room (area E3). Dreadful Hos t. The figure watching through the win dow is Kaevja Cynavern (see area E3), and she can see thro ugh the purple mist between the two rooms easily enough . She uses a sending spell to contact Manshoon as soon as the characters arrive. Manshoon sends his simu lacrum (see appendix B) to unlock the door to area E2 and greet the new arrivals. It takes 1 minute for the simulacrum to arrive (from area E7), during which time Kaevja uses another sending spell to inform a random character that "Your gracious host is on the way, and looks forward to meeting you." When the simulacrum arrives, it passes itself off as Manshoon as it welcomes the characters to its extradi mensional sanctum . It offers a guided tour, gesturing for the characters to enter area E2 ahead of it. If they com ply, it triggers the alarm in area E2 and attacks. Glass Walls. Each 5-foot section of glass wall has AC 13, 30 hit points, and immunity to acid, poison, and psy chic damage. The purple mist that fills the demiplane doesn't enter this area even if the glass is shattered. Teleportati on Circle. The teleportation circle func tions as described under the spell of the same name in the Player's Handbook. Additionally, a creature wearing a teleporter ring (see "Teleporter Rings," page 157) can use this circle to access the teleportation circle in Kolat Towers (area K22). A te/eporter ring that is brought within 5 feet of the circle begins to hum softly.

### E2.Foyer

The door to area El is locked. All other doors leading from this room are unlocked. This foyer bas the follow ing features: • Set into the alabaster floor is a large symbol in black marble, depicting a winged snake biting a coin. Char acters recognize this as the symbol of the Zhentarim . (The coin conceals an alarm mechanism.)

### Chapter 8 I Winter Wizardry

## Page 159

One square = 5 feet MAP a.2: ExTRAotMENs•oNAL SANCTUM • Hanging on the walls are twelve metal masks bear ing human- like visages . Alarm Mechanism . The I-foot-diameter, disk-shaped tile that serves as the coin in the Zhentarim symbol is actually a pressure plate. When pressed or stepped on, it sounds a magic gong that can be heard throughout the sanctum. The alarm can be disabled by someone who makes a successful DC 20 Dexterity check using thieves' tools, but it triggers accidentally if the check fails by 5 or more. The alarm brings the following de fenders, who attack all intruders in the room: • Kaevja Cynavern (see area E3) The Manshoon simulacrum (see area E7) • Vevette Blackwater and Agorn Fuoco (see area E8) Ravia Quickknife and Mookie Plush (see area £10) If the characters manage to overcome all these foes, they are free to explore the sanctum. Manshoon awaits them in area El2. Cha racte rs who are reduced to 0 hit points by Man shoon's defenders are knocked unconscious . If the entire party is defeated , the unconscious characters are stripped of their spell books and magic items (including any teleporter rings they obtained in Kolat Towers). They then awaken in a back alley of Waterdeep with 1 hit point each . Jf the characters return to Kolat Towers, they find the place cleared out and the teleportation cir cle in a rea K22 permanently dispelled. Masks ofManshoon . The masks belong to Manshoon and have been worn by hiro in the past. A detect magic

### Chapter 8 I Wintp.R Wizardry

spell or simila r magic reveals an aura of evocation magic around each one. Any creature that dons a mask takes 9 (2d8) lightning damage. Once this effect trig gers, the mask becomes nonmagi cal and harmless.

### E3. Guard Station

A 5-foot-square window in this area looks out toward area El. Unless she has been drawn elsewhere , Kaevja Cynavern stands watch in front of the window. Kaevja was a Red Wizard of Thay until she saw an opportunity to study magic under Manshoon. Before he accepted her, Manshoon forced her to remove her distinctive Thayan head tattoos and to trade in her Red Wizard robes for black ones. Kaevja Cynavern is a female Mulan human mage. with these changes: • Kaevja is Lawful evil. She knows Common, Draconic, Dwarvish., and Elvish. • She has the sending spe ll prepared instead of the fly spell , and she carries a yellow elemental gem. In battle, Kaevja breaks the elemental gem, summon ing an earth elemental and commanding it to attack her enemies.

### E4. Pantry

This room contains the following features: • Floor-to-ceiling shelves are stuffed with breads, cheeses, dried meats, nuts, and a few baskets of fresh produce.

## Page 160

• Two barrels labeled ~WATER" and two labeled ~ALE" are crammed into a comer.

### E5 . Laboratory

This room contains the following features: • Beakers, bottles, and test tubes are set on a marble ta ble in the middle of this room, next Lo a basin of water. One staircase descends 10 feet to area E2. and an other ascends 10 feet to area E6. Urstul Floxin . If he survived earlier encounters with the cha racters, Urstul Floxin (see appendix B) stands at the table, dourly scrubbing lab equipment. He is being punished for allowing the Stone ofGolorr to slip through his fingers (during the events of chapter 3). Nevertheless, he remains loyal to Manshoon. If he is confronted, Urstul feigns anger toward the wizard and offers to help the characters defeat him, but this ruse can be seen through by someone who makes a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Insight) check. Given the chance, Urstul leads the characters to Manshoon, then attacks them to prove his unwavering loyalty in front of his master. If the characters fall for Urstul's ruse but nevertheless demand that he relinquish his weapons in order to accompany them, the Zhent assassin laughs at them and attacks.

### E6. Binding Chamber

A circle inscribed with runes is carved into the alabaster Boor of this room. It radiates an aura of abjuration magic when targeted by a detect magic spell or similar magic. Manshoon uses the circle to bind extraplanar crea tures . When a celestial, an elemental, a fey, or a fiend is summoned inside the circle, it can't voluntarily leave that area until its summoner uses an action to suppress the circle's magic for 1 minute. The magic is also sup pressed if any part of the circle falls within an antimagi c field, or if dispel magic (DC 17) is successfully cast on it.

### E7. Manshoon

1

### S Simulacrum

This room is extremely cold and contains the follow ing features: Frigid air blows into the room through small vents in the Boor. In the middle of the room is an open sar cophagus carved from ice, which contains a humanoid figure made of snow. • The back wall is made of 5-inch-thick curved glass. Frost covers the glass, partia lly blotting out the swirl ing purple mist of the demiplane beyond. Simula crum. If it hasn't been summoned elsewhere, Manshoon's simulacrum (see appendix B) is standing before the glass wall with its back to the door. The simulacrum resembles a robed wizard with long black hair, pale skin, and an articulated metal left hand and forearm. Its face is concealed behind a steel mas k that bears a smiling visage. The simulacrum attacks anyone it doesn't recognize. Extrem e Cold. The rules for extreme cold (see chap ter 5 of the Dungeon Master's Guide) apply in this room. Glass Wall. Each 5-foot section of glass wall has AC 13, 30 hit points, and immunity to acid, poison, and psychic damage. The purple mist that fills the demiplane doesn't enter this room even if the glass is shattered. Simula crum Sarcophagus . This ice-carved container weighs 1.000 pounds and begins to melt if taken out of the room. The snow figure in the sarcophagus is part of the material component of a simulacrum spell. Man shoon can use it LO create a new simulacrum if his cur rent one is destroyed.

### E8. Reading Room

This room contains the following features: • Delightfu l warmth radiates from a brazier of green Bame encircled by eight cushioned chairs . • Unless they've been drawn elsewhere, two of Man shoon's lieutenants are here: Yevette Blackwater (CE female Tethyrian human s washbu ckler : see appendix B) and Agoro Fuoco (NE male Turami human bard ; see appendix B). Yevette is relaxing in a chafr, while Agoro strums a lyre. An alabaster staircase ascends 10 feet to area E9. Zhents. Yevette and Agoro are two of Manshoon's most trusted followers. Yevette commands the wizard's forces against the Xanathar Guild, while Agom com mands those who oppose the Zhents that aren 't loyal to Manshoon. At the moment, they are resting in the sanc tum while awaiting orders from Mans hoon. Green Flame Brazier. A detect magic spell or si m ilar magic reveals an aura of evocation magic around the brazier. The brazier casts a fireball spell (save DC 15) centered on itself whenever a creature in the room speaks the words "green ftame" aloud. Once the brazier has cast this spell, it can't do so again for another 24 hours . Agoro knows this feature of the brazier, and he uses it in combat if the situation is desperate.

### E9. Library

Alabaster shelves line every wall and jut out into the cen ter of this room, all of them packed with books that deal with subjects of interest to wizards. Manshoon has amassed a sizable collection, including ten rare volumes he removed from Duhlark Kolat's collection . Treasure. Each rare book is worth 50 gp, and the en tire collection is worth 5,000 gp. ElO. AUDIENCE CHAMBER High-ranking Zhents who desire an audience with Manshoon come here. The room contains the follow ing features: The area is split into two levels, with alabaster steps climbing 3 feet to a smaller raised platform overlook ing the larger area. The platform is bare except for three golden banners hanging on the back wall, each displaying the symbol of the Zhentarim-a black, winged snake biting a coin. • The lower part of the room contains a black marble table surrounded by high-backed wooden cha irs. The table stands out in stark contrast against the alabaster walls and floor. • If they haven't been drawn elsewhere, two of Man shoon's followers are sparring and engaged in mock fisticuffs atop the table. CHAPTER 8 I WINT£R WIZARDRY

## Page 161

Zhents. Two female lightfoot halflings-Havia Quick knife and Mookie Plush - believe that Manshoon is the rightfu l leader of the Zhentarim. They serve him fear less ly, and will sacr ifice themsel ves to ensure that his plans come to fruition. They are martial arts adepts (see appendix B), with these changes: • Havia and Mookie are lawful evil. • They have 49 (lld6 + 11) hit points eac h. They have these racial traits: They are Small, and their walkin g speed is 25 feet. They can move through the space of a Medium or larger creature. They have advantage on saving throws against being frightened. They speak Common and Halfling. Havia and Mookie each wear a teleporter ring (see "Teleporter Rings ," page 157). Ell . ZHENT QUARTERS This room conta ins the following features: • Pressed against the walls of th is room are five wooden beds (three sized for humans, two for halflings). • Next to each bed is a wooden chest. • An alabaster sta ircase descends to area El2. Kaevja Cynavero, Yevette Blackwater, Agoro Fuoco, Havia Quickknif e, and Mookie Plush all sleep here. Treasur e. In addition to folded clothes and worthless personal effects, each of the chests holds treasure. Kaevja's chest contain s a gold amu let inset with a red crystal rune (worth 250 gp). A success ful DC 15 Intelli gence (Arcana) check reveals that the rune is a symbol of evocat ion, though the amulet is nonmagical. Yevette's chest has thre e potions of healing. Agorn's chest contains a bundle of love letters from someone named Tamzyn. Hidden in one of the enve lopes is an elega nt platinum necklace (worth 250 gp), featu ring a tiny ca meo containing a sketched portrait of a beautiful Tura mi woman. In Havia's chest is a golden comb shap ed like a styl ized dragon with tiny rubies for eyes (worth 250 gp). Mookie's chest conta ins a t iny ha lfling doll. Stuffed inside the doll is a pouch that holds five 100 gp pear ls. El2. MANSHOON'S QUARTERS No one aside from Manshoon is allowed down here. The alabaster stai rs that lead to this room desce nd 10 feet farther to area El3. This room contains the following features: • Across from the stairs stands a large bed with pur ple sheets. Sitting on the edge of the bed is a hand some young male human in elegant robes. Long black hair partially conceals his angelic face as he attaches a metal appendage to the withered stump of his left arm. The only other piece of furniture is a table with legs carved to resemb le winged serpent s. Displayed on the table is a meta l mask with an intimidating, tyranni ca l visage. The handsom e young figure is Manshoon (see appen dix B), who is much older than he looks.

### Chapter 8 I Winter Wizardry

This version of Manshoon is n't spo iling for a fight. He com mends the characte rs for making it this far a nd shows no concern for the Zhents they defeated to reac h him, since he considers all his followers expendabl e. The cha racte rs' best chance of survival is to convince Manshoon that they can be cowed or bribed into work ing for him. Weary of his conflict with the Xanathar Guild, Manshoon suggests that the characters prove their usefulness to him by huntin g down and killin g Xanathar in its lair (see cha pter 5). Manshoon also demands that they keep his prese nce in Waterdeep a secret for now, saying that he will reward them for their discretion "when the time comes ." In exchange , he allows the characters to return to Waterdeep and promises them positions of power in his organization once Xanathar's death is confirmed. He has no intention of making good on this promis e, but refus ing to work for him puts the chara cters in a tight spot, s ince the evil archwiza rd can't risk expos ure. If a fight breaks out, Manshooo grabs his staff of power(which he hides unde r the bed) and holds his ground . For more information on how to play Man shoon, see "Facing Manshoon" at the beginning of this chapter . Tyrant's Mask. Th e mask on the table is nonma gical, but Manshoon likes to put it on before meeting with bis followers.

### E13. Manshoon'S Study

The alabast er stairs end here. The room contains the following features: • A plush lavender carpet covers the floor. • In one far corner of the room , a low table is set betwee n two purple couches. The table has a thin drawer built into it. In the other far corne r, Manshoon 's spe llbook rests atop a black marbl e lecte rn protected by an invisible helmed horror. The construct attacks anyone other than Mans hoon who disturb s the book (becom ing visi ble as it does so). It obeys Manshoon's commands if he is present, and it fights until destroyed. Table. The table's drawer has an arcane lock spe ll cast on it. The spell can be bypas sed by someone who makes a success ful DC 25 Dexterity check using thieves' tools, or with a knock spell or simi lar magic. The drawer can also be forced open with a successful DC 21 Strength (Athletics) check. Inside is a leather-bo und ledge r that provides a paper trai l implicat ing Manshoon in two blackmail schemes . An hour spe nt study ing the ledger uncovers the following informa tion: • Corylus Thaon, a racist Waterdavian noble, is paying the Zhentarim not to revea l that he hired Zhent thugs to assault nonhumans. • Jelenn Urmbrusk, a Waterdavian noble, rece ives regu lar payments from the Zbentarim to offset monies he loses in bad investments. The ledger doesn't reveal that Corylus Thann and jelenn Urmbrusk are Masked Lord s, or that Manshoon 's blackmail of them also forces them to use their infiu-

## Page 162

ence to cover up or dismiss crimes perpetrated by Man shoon's forces in Waterdeep. Jf the authorities obtain the ledger, they round up anyone suspected of having ties to Manshoon or the Zhentarim. which disrupts the wiz ard's operation (see "Disrupting Manshoon's Operation ," page 147). Surprisingly, neither Corylus nor Jelenn is arrested or even questioned. Slipped into the ledger is a piece of paper with a list of names in Man shoon's handw riting. Manshoon keeps this list of Masked Lord s whose identities he knows, with check mark s indicating the ones he's blackmailing: Mirt Corylus Thann ../ Thardouk Starbuckler jelenn Urmbrusk ../ Dorgar Adarbrent Man sh oon's Spe/Jbool<. This spellbook weighs 20 pounds and is covered in beholder hide. l t contains all the spells Manshoon has prepared (see appendix B) plus the following spells: alarm, alter self, animate dead, an timagic field, arcane lock, blight, dispel magic, dominate monst er, dream, etherealness, Evard's black tentacles, feather fall, fireball, fly, gaseous form, geas, gentle re pose, glyph of warding, hold monster, major image, mass suggestion, phantom stee d, protection from evil and good, scrying, symbo l, telekinesis. teleport. teleportation circle, Tenser's floating disk, tongues. true seeing. vam piric touch, wall of/i re, and wish. Stealing or destroy ing this spellbook disrupts Manshoon·s operation (see "Disruptin g Manshoon's Operation." page 147), since he must devote time and resources to retrieving or re placing it If Laeral Silverhand has the opportunity to trade for Manshoon 's spellbook. she offers the characters a sailing ship and a set of bracers of archery for it. Vajra Safahr offers the characters membership in Force Grey, a cape of the mount ebank, and a wand oflightning bolts for the book. Stone ofGolo rr. If Manshoon has the Stone ofGo lorr, he keeps it in the drawer of the table along with his ledger.

### Special Events

You can use one or more of the following special events before or after the characters explore Kolat Towers and Manshoon 's extradim ensional sanctum.

### B Lackmailed Lor Ds

The events described in this section might occur if the characters obtain the ledger from area El3 and use the information in it to confront either Corylus Thann or jelenn Urmbrusk about their suspicious dealings with Manshoon. The Thann and Umbrusk families have walled estates in the Sea Ward. CORYLUS ThANN The Thann s arc Waterdeep's most prominent vint ners and have deep root s in the city. Corylus (LE male Tethyrian human noble) is happy to let other members

## Page 163

of his family manage the wine business while he fo. cuses on his duties as a Masked Lord. Unfortunately, he lacks the principles and sound judgment that have led to House Thann's success in the past. He also places the welfare of humans above nonhumans. In the past, he has used Zhentarim thugs to inflict harm on nonhu mans who sought positions of political power in the city. Now the Zhents are blackmailing Corylus, threatening to expose his bigotry unless he uses his influence as a Masked Lord to cover up their illegal activities. The characters are most likely to encounter Corylus as he travels through the city by coach, accompanied by six human guard s who watch his back and keep the rabble at bay. Corylus refuses to speak with the party. If the characters become an annoyance, he has eight crooked members of the City Watch (human veteran s) crack down on them, then uses his position as Masked Lord to clear any charges leveled against these Watch members. Corylus refuses lo be indebted to anyone, so any attempt by the characters to curry favor with him is met with suspicion, if not outright hostility. Even if they dispose of Manshoon, Corylus refuses to acknowledge that he owes them anything. j ELENN U RM BRUSK jelenn (N female Tethyrian human nobl e) is a proud woman in her fifties who desperately wants to get out of debt. Several bad investments ruined her money-lend ing business, and most of her reliable customers have turned to other providers such as the Cassalanters. Jelenn could have borrowed money from any of a num ber of nobles in the city or sold off some of the property her family owns in Waterdeep, but doing so would have turned her private financial woes into local gossip. Fear of that exposure led her to borrow money from the Zhentarim instead -a decision she has come to regret. The Zhents working for Manshoon promise ro keep their relationship secret on the condition that she do everything in her power to further the group's welfare in Waterdeep. When not dealing with her slimy creditors,Jelenn is occupied with Masked Lord business. She has no time for a face-to-face meeting with anyone she doesn't know. Characters can confront her as she comes or goes to and from her villa, but she never travels without sixteen guard s who form a protective wall around her. II the characters brazenly mention Manshoon or the Zhen tarim by name to her,Jelenn demands that they leave her alone or face dire consequences.Jelenn's threat is mostly bluster, since she's not eager to make enemies. If the characters freejelenn from the yoke of the Black Network by defeating Manshoon, her debt is effectively canceled. Jn her delight, she grants them a special favor (see ··special Favors" in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Mas ter's Guide). On the other hand, if they threaten to go to the press with Manshoon's ledger in an attempt to black mail or discredit her, she pretends to go along with them while secretly using her influence as a Masked Lord to make their lives difficult. CllAPTF.R 8 J WINTl!.R WIZARDRY

### D Ea Dwi Nter D Ay Feast

The Fellowship of Innkeepers in conjunction with the Bakers· Guild. the Guild of Butchers. and the Vintners'. Distillers·. and Brewers ' Guild decides to hold a Dead winter Day feast for the residents of Trollskull Ailey. Broxley Fairkettle (see "Sample Guild Representatives," page 41) asks the characters if they would be willing to host the feast in their tavern. He believes the gesture would be appreciated by their neighbors, in light of the recent deaths in the area (see chapter 3). If the characters offer up their tavern for the feast, guild representatives arrive to stock and decorate it for the event. During the three days before the holiday, the tavern is bustling with activity and excitement. Hun dreds show up on the day of the feast to partake-not only residents ofTrollskull Alley. but also folk from neighboring streets. There 's plenty of food to go around, but the tavern practically groans under the weight of the crowd, and additiona l tab les arc set up outside to hand le the over£low. People don't appear to mind, even as heavy snow begins to fall. Members of the City Watch are on hand to make sure everyone behaves. Nothing violent happens during the Deadwinter Day feast, but the tavern suffers damage as a result of the crowds. The Carpenters', Roofers', and Plaisterers' Guild offers to make repairs for free, but the characters must close the establishment for a tenday to facilitate the work. The closure has no effect on business in the long term, however, since the feast fosters such goodwill that clients return in force when the tavern reopens. The feast is a great opportunity for characters to hobnob with neighbors, guild members, and City Watch constables, as well as to gather information on local happenings.

### Sec Ret S Imul Ac Ru M

ff the characters make an enemy of Manshoon, he tries to capture one of them and replace that character with a magical duplicate created using the simulacrum spell. lf one of the players is absent for a game session and circumstances allow it, Manshoon targets that character for replacement while the rest of the party is distracted by other matters. You don't need to roleplay the char acter's capture; just assume it happens. To create a simulacrum of the character. Manshoon needs some hair, fingernail clippings, or other piece of the charac ter's body. Once he obtains the necessary components from the captured character, he creates the simulacrum and sends it to the party with instructions to spy on the group and undermine it from within. If Manshoon embeds a simulacrum within the party, talk privately to the player whose character has been replaced. Then have that player run the simulacrum until it is destroyed or the character it replaced is rein troduced. The simulacrum has the sa me statistics as the character, but it has only half the character's hit point maximum and can't gain levels.
