# Appendix A: Magic Items

_Source pages: 190-193_

## Page 190

### Appendix A: Magic Items

This appendix describes new magic items that appear in the adventure, and which are presented here in alpha betical order. Several of these items are found in the possession of specific NPCs: • Aurinax has the dragonstaff of Ahghairon. • jalester Silverman e has a badge of the Watch. • Jarlax le Baenr e has a bracer of daggers, a feather of diatryma summoning, a knave's eye patch, and a ring of truth telling. • Meloon Wardragon has Azuredge. • Vajra Safahr has the Blackstaff.

### Azuredge

Weapon (battleaxe), legendary (requires attunement) Forged by the archwizard Ahghairon, this intelligent battleaxe was crafted lo defend Watcrdeep. Jts current wielder is a former member of Force Grey named Meloon Wardragon (see appendix 8), but the weapon is searching for a new owner. Azuredge has a solid steel handle etched with tiny runes, wrapped in blue dragon hide with a star sapphire set into the pommel. The axe head is forged from silver, electrum, and steel alloys whose edges constantly shim mer with a deep blue luminescence. You gain a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls mad e with this magic weapon. The shield spell provides no de fense against the axe, which passes through that spell's barrier of magical force. When you hit a fiend or an undead with the axe, cold blue flames erupt from its blade and deal an extra 2d6 radiant damage to the target. Hurling. The battleaxe has 3 charges. You can expend 1 charge and make a ranged attack with the axe, hurling it as if it had the thrown property with a normal range of 60 feet and a long range of 180 feet. Whether it hits or misses, the axe flies back to you at the end of the current turn, land ing in your open hand or al your feet in your space (as you choose). The axe regains all expended charges daily at dawn. mummation . While holding the axe, you can use an action to cause the axe to glow blue or to quench the glow. This glow sheds bright light in a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet. Sentience. Azuredge is a sentient lawful neutral weapon with an Intelligence of 12, a Wisdom of 15, and a Charisma of 15. It has hearing and darkvision out to a range of 120 feet. The weapon communicates telepathically with its wielder and can s peak, read, and understand Common. It has a calm, delicate voice. The weapon can sense the presence of non-lawful creatu res within 120 feet of it. Personality . Azuredge is sworn to protect Waterdecp, and it desires to be wielded by a law-abiding person willing to dedicat e everything to the city's defense. The weapon is patient and takes its time finding its ideal wielder. If someone tries to use Azuredge against its will, the axe can become ten times heavier than normal, and can magically adhere to any Medium or larger object or su rface it comes into contact with. Once it does so, the axe can 't be wielded. Nothing short of a wish spell can separate the axe from the item or s urface to which it is adhered without destroying one or the other, though the axe can choose to end the effect at any time.

### B Adge Of The Watch

Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement by someone designated by the Open Lord of Waterdeep) A badge of the Watch is given only to those who have earned the trust of the Open Lord of Waterdeep. The badge, signifying the rank of captain in Waterdeep 's City Watch, bears the emblem ofWaterdeep and is meant to be worn or carried. While wearing the badge, you gain a +2 bonus to AC if you aren 't using a shield . If the badge is more than 5 feet away from you for more than I minute. it vanishe s and harmlessly reap pears on a surface within 5 feet of the Open Lord. While holding the badge, the Open Lord knows your location, provided the two of you are on the same plane of exis tence and your attunement to the badge hasn't ended. As an action, the Open Lord can touch the badge and end your attuncment to it. 6AOGE OF THf WATCH

### Appendix A I Magic Items

## Page 191

### Blackstaff

Staff, legendary (requires attunement by the Blackstaff heir, who must be a wizard) The Blackstaffis a sentient, rune -carved staff set with thin silver veins. It is the symbol of office for the Black staff, the highest-ranking wizard in Waterdeep. As the rightful owner of the Blackstaff, Vajra Safahr is the only one who can become attuned to it. The staff can. how ever, choose a new owner (see "Personality" below). The Blacksta/Thas the magical properties of a staff of power (see the Dungeon Master's Guide) in addition to the following properties. Animate Walking Statu es. You can expend 1 or more of the staff's charges as an action to animate or deacti vate one or more of the walking statues ofWaterdeep (see appendix 8). You must be in the city to use this property, and you can animate or deactivate one statue for each charge expended. An animated statue obeys the telepathic commands ofK helbcn Arunsun's spirit, which is trapped inside the staff (see "Personality" be low). A walking statue becomes inanimate if deactivated or if the staff is broken. Dispel Magic. You can expend 1 of the staff's charges as a bonus action to cast dispel magic on a creature, an object, or a magical effect that you touch with the tip of the staff. If the target is an unwilling creature or an object in the possession of such a creature, you must hit the creature with a melee attack using the Blackstaff before you can expend the charge to cast the spell. Drain Magic. This property affects only creatures that use spell slots. When you hit such a creature with a rnelee attack using the Blackstall, you can expend J of the staff's charges as a bonus action, causing the target to expend one spell slot of the highest spell level it can cast without casting a spell. If the target has already expended all its spell slots, nothing happens. Spell slots that are expended in this fashion are regained when the target finishes a long rest, as normal. Master of Enchantment. When you cast an enchant ment spell of l st level or higher whi le holding the staff, you can make an Intelligenc e (Arcana) check w ith a DC of 10 +the level of the spell. If the check succeeds, you cast the spell without expending a spell slot. Sentience. The Blackstaffis a sentient staff of neutral alignment, with an Intelligence of 22, a Wisdom of 15, and a Charisma of 18. It has hearing and darkvision out to a range of 120 feet, and it can communicate telepathi cally with any creature that is holding it. Personality. The staff has the spirits of aJI previous BlackstafTs trapped within it. Its creator, Khelben Arun sun, is the dominant personality among them. Like Khelben, the staff is extremely devious and manipu lative. It prefers to counsel its owner without exerting outright control. The staff's primary goal is to protect Waterdeep and its Open Lord, currently Laeral Silver hand. Its secondary goal is to help its wielder become more powerful. In the event that the holder of the office of the Black staff no longer serves the staff's wishes, the staff ceases to function until it finds a worthy inheritor - someone whose loyalty to Waterdcep is beyond reproach . /\PPENOIX A I MAG IC ITEMS Spirit Trap. When the Blackstaff dies, the spirit of that individual becomes trapped in the staff along with the spirits of the previous Blackstaffs. (A Blackstalf whose spirit is trapp ed in the staff can't be raised from the dead.) Destroying the staff would release the spirits trapped inside it, but in that event, Khelben 's spirit can lodge itself inside any one piece of the staff that remains. The piece containing Khelbcn's spirit has the staff's Sentience property but none of its other properties. As long as this piece of the staff exists, Khelbeo's spirit can make the staff whole again whenever he wishes . When the staff is remade, the spirits of the previous Black staffs become trapped inside it again.

### Bracer Of Flying Daggers

Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement) This armba nd appears to have thin daggers strapped to it. As an action, you can pull up to two magic daggers from the bracer and immediately hurl them, making a ranged attack with each dagger. A dagger vanishes if you don't hurl it right away, and the daggers disappear right after they hit or miss. The bracer never runs out of daggers. LoRo's ENSEMBLE

## Page 192

### Dragonstaff Of Ahghairon

Staff, legendary (requires attunement) While holding the dragonstaff of Ahghairon, you have advantage on saving throws against che speUs and breath weapons of dragons, as well as the breath weapons of other creatures of lhe dragon type (such as dragon turtles). A creature of the dragon type that you touch with the slaff can move through the city ofWaterdeep, ignoring Ahghairon's dragonward (see "Ahghairon's Dragon ward," page 6). This effect lasts until the creature is touched again by the staff or until a time you proclaim when you confer the benefit. The staff has 10 charges. While holding it, you can expend 1 charge as an action to cast the command spell. If you target a dragon with this casting, the dragon has disadvantage on its saving throw. The staff regains ldlO charge s daily al dawn.

### Feather Of Diatryma Summoning

Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement) This bright plume is made from the feather of a dia tryma (pronounced dee-ah-TRY-mah), a Large, colorful, flightless bird native to the Underdark. If you use an ac tion to speak the command word and throw the feather into a Large unoccupied space on the ground within 5 feet of you, the feather becomes a living diatryma for up to 6 hours, after which it reverts to its feather form. 1t reverts to feather form ea rly if it drops to 0 hit points or if you use an action to speak the comma nd word again while touching the bird. When the diatryma reverts to feat her form, the magic of the feather can't be used again until 7 days have passed. The diatryma uses the statistics of an axe beak, except that its beak deals piercing damage instead of slashing damage. The creatu re is friendly to you and your companions, and it can be used as a mount. It un derstands your languages and obeys your spoken com mands. Jf you issue no commands, lhe diatryma defends itself but takes no other actions.

### Knave'S Eye Patch

Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement) While wearing this eye patch, you gain these benefits: You have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight. • If you have the Sunlight Sensitivity trait, you are unaf fected by the lrait. • You are immune to magic that allows other creatures lo read your thoughts or determine whether you are lying. Creatures can communicate telepath ically with you only if you allow it.

### Lord'S Ensemble

Wondrous item. very rare (requires attunement by a creature with a humanoid build) The Masked Lords ofWaterdeep don this ensemble when meeting with one another. This raiment renders each lord indistinguishable from the others . The en semble consists of three pieces a helm, an amulet, and a robe - that function as a sing le magic item when worn together, but only withi n the city ofWaterdeep and its sewers. You become attuned to the ensemble as a sing le item. Lord 's Helm. This bucket helm covers your head and concea ls your face. Screens over the eyes help to shroud your identity without blindin g you. While you wear the helm, your voice is magically altered to sound gender less, and you are immune to magic that allows other creat ures to read your thoughts, to determine whether you are lying, to know your alignment, or to know your creature type. Creatures can commun icate telepathi cally with you only if you allow it. Lord's Amulet . This amulet bears the crest of Water deep. It functions as an amulet of proof against detection and location. Lord's Robe. This elegant robe functions as a ring of free action, and it creates the illusion that you have a nondesc ript. androgynous humanoid build and stand 6 feet tall.

### Paper Bird

Wondrous item. uncommon After you write a message of fifty words or fewer on this magic sheet of parchment and speak a creatu re's name, the parchment magicaJly folds into a Tiny paper bird and Hies to the recipient whose name you uttered. The recipient must be on the same plane of existence as you, otherwise the bird turns into ash as it takes flight. The bird is an object that has 1 hit point, an Armor Class of 13, a flying speed of 60 feet, a Dexterity of 16 PAPER 15tRO

### Appendix A I Magic Items

## Page 193

SToNe OF" GoLORR (+3), and a score of 1 (- 5) in all other abilities, and it is immune to poison and psychic damage. lt travels to within 5 feet of its intended recipient by the most direct route, whereupon it turns into a non magical and inanimate sheet of parchment that can be unfolded only by the intended recipient. If the bird's hit points or speed is reduc ed to 0 or if it is otherwise im mobilized, it turns into ash. Paper birds usually come in small, flat boxes contain ing ld6 + 3 sheets of the parchment.

### Ring Of Truth 'Telling

Ring, uncommon (requires attuncment) While wearing this ring, you have advantage on Wisdom (Insight) checks to determine whether someone is ly ing to you.

### Smokepowder

Wondrous item, uncommon Smokepowder is a magical explos ive chiefly used to propel a bullet out of the barrel of a firearm. It is stored in airtight wooden kegs or tiny, waterproof leather packets. A packet contains enough smokepowder for five shots, and a keg holds enoug h smo kepowder for five hundr ed shots. If smokepowder is set on fire, dropped, or otherwise handl ed roughly, it explodes and dea ls fire damage to each creature or object within 20 feet of it: ld6 for a packet, 9d6 for a keg. A successful DC 12 Dexterity sav ing throw halves the damag e. Casting dispel magic on smokepowder renders it per manently inert. APP£NDIX A 1 MAGIC ITEMS

### Stone Of Golorr

Wondrous item, artifact (requires attunement) The Stone ofGolorr is a glossy, greenish-gray stone that fits in the palm of your hand. The s tone is actually an aboleth named Golorr, transformed by magic into an object. Random Properties. The Stone of Golorr has the following properties, determined by rolling on the tables in the "Artifacts" section in chapt er 7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide: • 1 minor beneficial property • l minor detrimental property Legend Lore. The Ston e of Golorr has 3 charges and regains ld3 expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the stone, you can expend 1 of its charges to cas t the legend lore spell. By using the stone to cast legend lore, you comm uni cate directly with the aboleth, and it shares its knowl edge with you. The aboleth can't lie to you, but the infor mation it provides is often cryptic or vague. The aboleth koows where Lord Neverember's secret vault is located. It also knows that three keys are needed to open the vault and that a gold dragon named Aurinax inhabits the vault and guards its treasures. Failed Memory. When your attunement to the Stone of Colorr ends, you must make a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, you lose all memory of the stone being in your possession and all knowledge imparted by it. A remove curse spell cast on you has a 20 percent chance of restoring the lost knowledge and memories , and a greater restoration spe ll does so automat ically. Sentience . The Stone of Golorr is a sentient lawful evil magic ilem with an Intelligen ce or 18, a Wisdom of 15, and a Charisma of 18. It has hearing and darkvision out to a range of 120 feet. It can com muni cate telepath ically with the creature that is attuned to it, as long as that creature understands at least one language. Io addi tion, the aboleth learns the greatest desires of any crea ture that commu nicates telepathi ca lly with the stone. The Stone ofGo lorr hungers for information and prefers not to rema in in the clutches of any creature for too long. Whenever the stone desires a new owner, it demand s to be given to another intellige nt creature as quickly as possible. If its demand s are ignored , it tries to take control of its owner (see "Se ntient Magic Items" in chap ter 7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). Perso nality. The Stone ofGolorr has an alien intellect that is both domineering and hun gry for knowledge. It thinks of itself as an ageless and immortal god. Des troying the Stone. While in stone form. the aboleth isn't a creature and isn't subject to effects that target creat ures. The Stone o!Colorr is immune to all damage. Casting an antipathy/sympathy spell on the s tone destroys it if the antipathy effect is selected and the spe ll is directed to repel aberrations. When the spell is cast in this way, the stone tran sforms into mucus and is destroyed. and Golorr the aboleth appears in an unocc upied space within 30 feet of the stone's remains. The aboleth is incensed by the stone's destruction, and it attacks all other creatures it can see.
